

--- Page 1 ---

Delft University of Technology
CAMDA: Capacity Assessment Method for Decentralized Air Traffic Control
Sunil, Emmanuel; Ellerbroek, Joost; Hoekstra, Jacco
Publication date
2018
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript
Published in
2018 International Conference on Research in Air Transportation
Citation (APA)
Sunil, E., Ellerbroek, J., & Hoekstra, J. (2018). CAMDA: Capacity Assessment Method for Decentralized Air
Traffic Control. In 2018 International Conference on Research in Air Transportation: Barcelona, Spain, 2018
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10.

--- Page 2 ---

ICRAT 2018
CAMDA: Capacity Assessment Method for
Decentralized Air Traffic Control
Emmanuel Sunil, Joost Ellerbroek and Jacco M. Hoekstra
Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Delft University of Technology
Kluyverweg 1, 2629 HS, Delft, The Netherlands
Abstract—This paper presents a semi-empirical method to deter- regardless of the type or location of separation management,
mine the maximum theoretical capacity of decentralized airspace can be considered equivalent to the density at which the
concepts. The method considered here, named Capacity Assess- airspace becomes saturated; i.e., the density beyond which no
ment Method for Decentralized ATC (CAMDA), formalizes an additional traffic can be accommodated without significantly
earlier approach described in literature, extends it for three- degradingsystem-widemacroscopicproperties;propertiessuch
dimensional airspace, and also improves the accuracy of the
as the safety and efficiency of travel.
underlying models. CAMDA defines capacity as the traffic den-
sity at which conflict chain reactions propagate uncontrollably Using this view of airspace capacity as a starting point, pre-
throughout the entire airspace. CAMDA identifies this critical viousresearchhasidentifiedairspacestability,whichconsiders
densityusingasemi-empiricalapproachwherebymodelsdescrib- the propagation of conflicts as a result of tactical Conflict
ing the actions of decentralized conflict detection and resolution Resolution (CR) maneuvers, as an important aspect when
algorithmsarecombinedwithempiricallyobtainedconflictcount evaluating the saturation density of decentralized ATC [8], [9].
data. The CAMDA method is demonstrated in this work for a These studies have shown that CR can destabilize the airspace
decentralizeddirectroutingen-routeairspaceconceptthatutilizes at high traffic densities by triggering conflict chain reactions
astate-basedconflictdetectionalgorithm,andavoltagepotential-
due to the scarcity of airspace, as well as due to the type
based conflict resolution algorithm. Three fast-time simulation
of airspace design and CD&R algorithms used. To measure
experiments were performed to study how the capacity of this
airspace stability, literature has also presented the so called
particular airspace design is affected by: a) conflict detection
Domino Effect Parameter (DEP) metric [8], [9]. The DEP
parameters;b)conflictresolutiondimension;andc)thespeeddis-
tribution of aircraft. The results showed that CAMDA estimated was subsequently used by Jardin to relate airspace stability
theoccurrenceofconflictchainreactionswithhighaccuracyforall to capacity for decentralization [10]. While Jardin’s approach
cases,enablingcapacityestimationsusingrelativelynon-intensive providesaninnovativemethodformeasuringairspacecapacity,
lowdensitytrafficsimulations.Therefore,CAMDAcanbeusedto it is only applicable for motion restricted to the horizontal
speed up the airspace design process by reducing the number of plane. Therefore the method, as derived by Jardin, does not
time consuming high-density traffic simulations that are required account for the effect of climbing/descending traffic, or the
when performing a trade-off between different airspace designs, effect of cruise-climb procedures, on capacity.
orwhenfine-tuningtheparametersoftheselectedairspacedesign.
The main goal of the current paper is to extend Jardin’s
Keywords—Airspacecapacity;airspacestability;DominoEffect
method for application in three-dimensional airspace such that
Parameter (DEP); self-separation; BlueSky ATM simulator
the effects of all flight phases on capacity can be taken into
account. Additionally, we have used our past experiences in
I. INTRODUCTION
developing and validating conflict count models to further
Despite the significant R&D efforts undertaken to overhaul increasetherealismandaccuracyofthemethod[11],[12].The
aging Air Traffic Control (ATC) systems, air traffic delays and resulting improved method, termed here Capacity Assessment
congestion continue to rise at an alarming rate [1]. In response Method for Decentralized ATC (CAMDA), makes use of the
to this pressing issue, several researchers have long advocated DEP to define the maximum theoretical capacity of decentral-
for a transfer of traffic separation responsibilities in en-route ized airspace as the density at which conflict chain reactions
airspace from ground-based Air Traffic Controllers (ATCos) become uncontrollable. Because conflict chain reactions are
to each individual aircraft [2]–[4]. The resulting decentralized caused by many interconnected factors that cannot be accu-
trafficseparationparadigmhasbeenshowntoincreaseairspace rately modeled for all conditions in a purely analytical sense,
capacity over current centralized operations by increasing the CAMDA is a semi-empirical approach. Therefore CAMDA
efficiency with which the available airspace is utilized [2]–[4]. relies on empirical data, obtained through simulation, to apply
To support decentralization, the research community has its capacity definition, and evaluate the capacity of a particular
largely focused on developing automated algorithms for air- airspaceconcept.Nonetheless,becausetheunderlyingCAMDA
borne Conflict Detection and Resolution (CD&R) [5]. Some models are based on the processes that govern CD&R, all its
studiesinthisdomainhavealsoinvestigatedifsuchalgorithms parameters have physical meaning. As such, the structure of
canbecombinedwithdifferentoptionsforstructuringairtraffic the CAMDA models themselves provide useful insights into
to further increase capacity over current operations [6]. the relationships between the factors that affect capacity for
However, in spite of over two decades of active research decentralization.
highlighting its theorized benefits, as well as successful flight- Thispaperbeginswithanoverviewoftherelevantdefinitions
testdemonstrationsoverMediterraneanairspace[7],decentral- in section II. Next, in section III, the complete derivation
ization is yet to be deployed in the field. From a technical of the CAMDA method is presented. To illustrate the utility
point of view, one possible reason for the reluctance to in- of the developed method, it is applied on empirical data
troduce decentralization may be explained by an insufficient gatheredfromfast-timesimulationsofadirect-routingen-route
understanding of the factors that affect airspace capacity for airspace concept that utilizes a state-based Conflict Detection
decentralization. This aspect is further complicated by the fact (CD) algorithm, and a voltage potential-based CR algorithm.
that most capacity measurement tools, such as those related to The design of these simulation experiments, which consider
ATCo workload, are not relevant for decentralized ATC. the effects of CD parameters, CR dimension, and the speed
But before a comprehensive capacity assessment method distribution of aircraft on capacity, are described in section IV.
can be developed for decentralized ATC, it is first necessary TheresultsoftheCAMDAmethodfortheconsideredairspace
to consider what the term ‘airspace capacity’ refers to in a design are given in section V. Finally, the main conclusions of
more general sense. At a fundamental level, airspace capacity, this study are summarized in section VI.

--- Page 3 ---

ICRAT 2018
II. BACKGROUND
This section summarizes the definitions and background
material used by the CAMDA method.
A. The Difference Between Conflicts and Intrusions
A conflict occurs if the horizontal and vertical distances
between two aircraft are expected to be less the prescribed
separationstandardswithinapredetermined‘look-ahead’time.
Fig.2. TheDominoEffectParameter(DEP)comparessimulationswithand
Conflicts are, therefore, predictions of future separation viola-
withoutConflictResolution(CR)tomeasureairspacestability
tions. Intrusions, also referred to as losses of separation, occur
when separation requirements are violated at the present time. denominator of the above equation1. Consequently, based on
This distinction between conflicts and intrusions is shown in the structure of (1), the DEP can be thought of as the number
Fig. 1. of secondary conflicts per primary conflict. Correspondingly, a
As mentioned earlier, CAMDA is concerned with the occur- higher value of DEP indicates higher airspace instability.
rences of conflict chain reactions. Therefore, the rest of this AstheDEPisconcernedwithconflictchains,itisinvariably
paper only deals with aspects that are relevant to conflicts. linked to the safety of the airspace. But because conflict chain
reactions also increase the flight distances of aircraft, the DEP,
and consequently the notion of airspace airspace stability, also
B. Airspace Stability and the Domino Effect Parameter
relates to airspace efficiency. The ability to simultaneously
Airspacestabilityrelatestotheoccurrenceofconflictchains consider both the safety and efficiency of air travel makes the
whentacticalCRmaneuversareused.Athightrafficdensities, DEP a powerful tool for airspace capacity analysis purposes.
such chain reactions can ‘destabilize’ the airspace by propa-
gating conflicts throughout the entire airspace. To measure the III. THECAMDAMETHOD
propagationofconflictchainreactions,literatureintroducesthe
ThissectionpresentsthecompletederivationoftheCAMDA
‘Domino Effect Parameter’ (DEP) [8], [9]. The DEP can be
method. It begins by introducing the airspace capacity defini-
visualized using the Venn diagram in Fig. 2. Here, C is
total,nr tion used by CAMDA. This definition is subsequently used to
thesetofallconflictswithoutCR,andC isthesetofall
total,wr derive the six components of the CAMDA approach.
conflicts with CR, for identical traffic scenarios. Furthermore,
three regions can be identified in Fig. 2; R1, R2 and R3.
A. CAMDA Capacity Definition
By comparing R3 with R1, the proportion of ‘destabilizing’
conflicts caused by CR can be determined. Thus, the DEP is When a conflict occurs, a conflict resolution action needs to
defined as: be taken to prevent that conflict from turning into an intrusion.
In the case of decentralized ATC, these resolutions can be
R3(⇢) R1(⇢) C total,wr (⇢) determined by pilots, or by automated onboard CR algorithms.
DEP =   = 1 (1)
C (⇢) C (⇢)   In either case, such tactical CR maneuvers can cause new
total,nr total,nr
conflicts, and in some cases, they can trigger conflict chain
The number of conflicts that occur is dependent on the reactions. At low traffic densities, the ample maneuvering
traffic density, ⇢, regardless of whether CR is used. Hence, room available would, under normal conditions, allow such
all parameters in the above equation are a function of ⇢. chainreactionstodissipatebythemselves,i.e.,withoutexternal
To interpret the output of the above equation, it is useful intervention.
to categorize conflicts in R 1 , R 2 , and R 3 . First, conflicts that When extrapolating this logic for extreme traffic densities, it
are common to both the CR OFF and CR ON cases are given islikelythatatacriticaltrafficdensity,thescarcityofairspace
by R 2 . However, as soon as CR is applied, the aircraft that becomes so severe that conflict chain reactions propagate
suffer conflicts will fly different routes, both spatially and throughout the entire airspace. This would cause all aircraft
temporally. Because of this, some conflict pairs that would to be inter-connected by a continuous, and perpetual conflict
have occurred with the original CR OFF trajectories will be chain. Under such circumstances, it is unlikely that any CR
avoided, and similarly, the altered CR ON trajectories can also maneuver by any aircraft could stabilize the airspace system.
trigger different conflict pairs. In Fig. 2, R 1 represents the This would in turn result in an uncontrollable situation where
avoided conflict pairs, and R 3 corresponds to the additional, allaircraftareresignedtocontinuallyperformmeaninglessCR
different conflict pairs. These additional conflict pairs can maneuvers, without ever being able to fly to their actual desti-
be either due to chance, or due to chain reactions, where a nations.TheCAMDAmethoddefinesthemaximumtheoretical
conflict resolution of a primary conflict immediately triggers a capacityofadecentralizedairspacedesignatthiscriticaltraffic
secondary, or knock-on, conflict. Therefore it follows that the density.
numerator,R 3 R 1 ,indicatestheamountbywhichthenumber To pin-point the aforementioned hypothetical density at
 
of additional conflicts outweighs the number of conflicts that which conflict chain reactions are uncontrollable, CAMDA
are avoided with CR, and as such, the net destabilizing effect makes use of the DEP; if all aircraft are ‘stuck’ in conflict
ofCR(orstabilizingifR 1 >R 3 ).Ifitisassumedthatconflict at the maximum theoretical density, then an infinite number
probability doesn’t change due to CR, the number of primary of secondary conflicts would be triggered by the resolution of
conflicts can be considered equivalent to C total,nr , i.e., the any primary conflict. Therefore, CAMDA defines the maximum
theoretical capacity as the density at which the rate of change
2𝑆 of the DEP with density tends to infinity. More formally, the
ℎ
CAMDA capacity definition can be stated as:
dDEP (⇢)
lim = , where ⇢ capacity (2)
max
⇢
!
⇢max d⇢ 1 ⌘
(a) Conflict (b) Intrusion 1CRmaneuversareunlikelytoreducethenumberofconflictscomparedto
thenoresolutioncase,expectforrelativelylowtrafficdensitieswhenCD&R
Fig.1. Thedifferencebetweenintrusionsandconflicts,displayedhereforthe algorithms are combined with Conflict Prevention (CP) systems. CP is not
horizontalplane.Here,Sh isthehorizontalseparationrequirement. consideredinthiswork.Referto[2]formoreonCP.

--- Page 4 ---

ICRAT 2018
B. CAMDA Framework
Step 1:
To evaluate the CAMDA capacity definition given by (2), it Instantaneous Conflict
isnecessarytoexpresstheDEPasafunctionof⇢.Asindicated Count Without CR
by (1), this requires the derivation of models for C and (𝐶 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡,𝑛𝑟 , Eq. 3)
total,nr
C as functions of ⇢. CAMDA derives such expressions
total,wr
using a six-step sequential framework, see Fig. 3. Here it can
beseenthattheframeworkconsistsoftwomainparts.Thefirst Step 2:
part focuses on modeling C , while the second focuses Total Conflict Count total,nr
on modeling C . Two assumptions, shown on the left Without CR
total,wr
(𝐶 , Eq. 8)
side of Fig. 3, are used to bridge these two main parts of the 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙,𝑛𝑟
framework. The final step uses these models, and applies the
CAMDA capacity definition to determine ⇢ via the DEP.
max
BeforeproceedingwiththederivationoftheCAMDAmodel Step 3:
components, it is necessary to highlight three aspects. Local Conflict Count
Firstly, it should be noted that CAMDA is a semi-empirical Per Unit Distance
Without CR
methodasoneofitsparametersneedtobedetermineddirectly
(𝐶′ , Eq. 12)
from simulation data. This is because conflict chain reactions, 1,𝑛𝑟
which are central to the CAMDA capacity definition, are
Assumption 1:
dependent on a number inter-linked factors, and the effects of
Local Conflict Count +
these interactions on capacity are difficult to model accurately
Per Unit Distance
using a purely analytical approach. These include emergent
behavior that results from interactions between the considered
Step 4:
CD&R algorithms and the selected mode for structuring air
Local Conflict Count
traffic. Per Unit Distance
Secondly, this work aims at demonstrating CAMDA for a With CR
three-dimensional direct-routing en-route airspace design that (𝐶′ , Eq. 13)
1,𝑤𝑟
is combined with a state-based CD algorithm, and a voltage
potential-based CR algorithm. Hence the models, as derived
Assumption 2: here, are only applicable for this particular case. Nevertheless,
Total A/C Count
the basic framework displayed in Fig. 3 can be applied to any
given decentralized airspace design. Because CAMDA is se-
quential,thismostlyinvolvesmakingappropriatemodifications Step 5:
to the first step of the CAMDA framework. Total Conflict Count
Finally, it should be noted that CAMDA is inspired by With CR
Jardin [10]. In addition to formalizing Jardin’s approach, (𝐶 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙,𝑤𝑟 Eq. 20)
the current paper extends his method for three-dimensional
airspace. Furthermore, because CAMDA relies on a sequential
framework, by using an improved model for the first step of Step 6:
theCAMDAframeworkusingresultsfromourpriorwork[11], Domino Effect
[12], the accuracy and realism of all subsequent steps is also Parameter
(𝐷𝐸𝑃, Eq. 23)
expected to be higher than in [10].
C. Step 1: Instantaneous Conflict Count Without CR
The goal of the first part of the CAMDA framework is to
compute the total number of conflicts without CR: C .
total,nr
As can be seen in Fig. 3, this process begins by modeling the
instantaneousconflictcountwithoutCR,C ,asafunction
inst,nr
of the number of instantaneous aircraft in the airspace without
CR, N . C will subsequently be used to calculate
inst,nr inst,nr
C in the next step of the derivation.
total,nr
For any airspace design, C can be modeled as the
inst,nr
product of two factors, namely the number of combinations
of two aircraft, and the conflict probability between any two
aircraft, p. In essence, the number of combinations of two air-
craft is the maximum number of conflicts that can occur, since
multi-aircraft conflicts, i.e., conflicts involving more than two
aircraft, can also be decomposed into a series of two-aircraft
conflicts. The conflict probability, on the other hand, scales
down the number of combinations so that only those aircraft
that are within range each other and those with intersecting
trajectories are counted as conflicts.
For the unstructured airspace design that is the focus of this
derivation process, the number of combinations can be com-
puted directly using the binomial theorem, since this airspace
design imposes no constraints on the motion of aircraft [11],
[12]. Therefore, C can be expressed as:
inst,nr
N (N 1) inst,nr inst,nr C =   p (3) inst,nr
2
To model the conflict probability, p, it is necessary to
consider the process of CD. In state-based CD, aircraft search
for conflicts within a volume of airspace in front of them. In
noituloseR
tcilfnoC
tuohtiW
noituloseR
tcilfnoC
htiW
+
Fig.3. SixstepsoftheCAMDAframework
essence, this involves a 4D extrapolation of aircraft position
vectors,assumingconstantvelocityvectors.Therefore,pcanbe
computedastheratiobetweenthevolumeofairspacesearched
for conflicts, B , and the total volume of the airspace under
c
consideration, B . For mathematical convenience, B can
total c
bedecomposedintoitshorizontalandverticalcomponents,see
Fig. 4. Using this approach, p as can be expressed as:
B +B 4 S S E(V )t +⇡S2 E(V )t p= c,h c,v = h v r,h l h r,v l
B B
total total
(4)
Here, S and S are the horizontal and vertical separation h v
requirements, and t is the CD ‘look-ahead’ time. E(V ) and l r,h
E(V ), are the horizontal and vertical components of the
r,v
expected relative velocity of all aircraft pairs. The expected
relative velocity can be considered equivalent to the weighted
average of the relative velocity of all aircraft pairs in the
airspace, taking into account the heading, altitude, spatial
and speed distributions of all aircraft. For a direct-routing
unstructured airspace design, we have derived the following
expressions for these two variables in our prior work [12]:
4V
E(V ) = (5a) r,h ⇡
E(V ) = V sin( ) 1 "2 (5b)
r,v  
   
Here, V is aircraft ground speed,   is the flight path angle

--- Page 5 ---

ICRAT 2018
countsperunitdistanceflown,forasingleaircraft withoutCR
(local). These models are needed to bridge the CR OFF and
CR ON parts of the CAMDA framework in subsequent steps.
Considerfirstthenumberofconflictsencounteredbyasingle
aircraft without CR, C . This can be calculated by dividing
1,nr
C by the total number of aircraft in the airspace during
total,nr
the analysis time interval T without CR, N :
total,nr
C
total,nr
C = (9)
1,nr
N
total,nr
Subsequently, the number of conflicts per unit distance for
a single flight, C , can be computed by dividing (9) by
Fig.4. Volumesearchedforconflictsbyanaircraftin3Dairspace 10,nr
the average flight distance in the airspace volume of interest
of climbing/descending aircraft, and " is the proportion of
without CR, D :
cruising aircraft in the airspace. All three variables are traffic nr
scenario related. Furthermore, the specific version of (4) and  C C
1,nr total,nr
(5) apply only for scenarios with uniform heading, altitude, C 10,nr =
 D
=
N D
(10)
and spatial distributions. The above equations also assume all nr total,nr nr
aircraft to fly with equal ground speeds. Because CAMDA is NotethattheCAMDAmethodconsidersD tobeaknown
nr
a sequential method, these assumptions affect subsequent steps input parameter. To express C as a function of ⇢, a model
10,nr
of the derivation. Nevertheless, the effect of the equal speed for N as a function of ⇢ is needed. This can be derived
total,nr
assumption on CAMDA is specifically tested in this research, as follows; to maintain a constant density of one aircraft in
see section V-C. The reader is referred to [13] for alternate an airspace, the aircraft replacement rate would have to be
versions of E(V r,h ) and E(V r,v ) for cases where the above V/D nr . Likewise, to maintain a density of N inst,nr aircraft,
‘ideal’ traffic scenario assumptions do not hold. the replacement rate would have to be N V/D .
inst,nr nr
·
Correspondingly,thetotalnumberofaircraftintroducedduring
D. Step 2: Total Conflict Count Without CR
an analysis interval of length T would be T N V/D .
inst,nr nr
The total number of conflicts without CR, C , can be By using (7), and the logic described here · , N · can be
total,nr total,nr
computedbysummingupthenumberofinstantaneousconflicts formulated as:
detected at each time step during an analysis time interval
T. The result of this summation should be divided by the
TVN TV
averageconflictduration,t c ,sothatconflictswhichoccurover N total,nr = inst,nr +N inst,nr =⇢A +1 (11)
multiple time steps are only counted once. Since a continuous D nr ✓ D nr ◆
summation over time is equivalent to an integration over time,
The first term on the right hand side of (11) is the number
a model for C can be computed as:
total,nr of aircraft that started their flights during the analysis time
interval, while the second term is the number of aircraft that
1 T were already present in the airspace at the start of the analysis
C = C dT
total,nr inst,nr time. Substitution of (8) and (11) into (10) yields:
t
c Z0 (6)
C inst,nr T pTA⇢
= t c C 10,nr = 2t c (TV +D nr ) (12)
To introduce traffic density, ⇢, into the derivation process,
F. Step 4: Local Conflict Count Per Unit Distance With CR
thefollowingrelationshipbetweenthenumberofinstantaneous
aircraft, N , and the area of the airspace, A, can be used: Whilethelastthreederivationstepsconsideredthecasewith-
inst,nr
out CR, the following three steps focus on conflict modeling
N
inst,nr with CR. Modeling the case with CR begins by developing an
⇢= (7)
A expression for the local conflict count per unit distance with
CR,C ,i.e.,the‘withCR’counterpartofthepreviousstep.
Substitution of (3) and (7) into (6) leads to the following 10,wr
final expression for C totalnr :
cen
T
t
o
ra
m
liz
o
e
d
d
el
sy
C
st
10
e
,w
m
r
.
,
I
c
n
o
s
n
u
s
c
id
h
e
a
r
s
t
y
h
s
e
te
m
m
o
,
t
i
i
t
on
is
o
p
f
os
tr
s
a
ib
ffi
le
c
t
w
ha
i
t
th
th
in
er
a
e
d
ar
e
e
-
no preferred directions, or because of a popular destination(s),
C = pTA2⇢ ⇢   A 1 pTA2⇢2 if ⇢ 1 (8) therecanbeoneormorepreferreddirections.Regardlessofthe
total,nr 2t ⇡ 2t   A typeofheadingdistribution,CRmaneuversbyasingleaircraft,
 c   c
or by multiple aircraft in different parts of the airspace, are
Notethattheaboveequationhasbeensimplifiedusingthefact
unlikely to affect the shape of the overall heading distribution
that ⇢ 1/A ⇢ for practical values of ⇢ and A. Also note
  ⇡ of the total airspace. Because this logic can also be applied
that under ideal conditions, t is equal to the look-ahead time,
c to all other traffic scenario distributions, such the altitude and
t , for state-based CD. However, simulation artifacts, such as
l spatial distribution of traffic, Jardin assumes that the number
pop-upconflictsbetweennewlyintroducedaircraftandexisting
of conflicts per unit distance does not vary substantially with
aircraft, can cause t <t . Because the frequency of such arti-
c l andwithoutCR[10].Asdescribedinsection.II-B,thisimplies
facts is very much dependent on the design of the simulations
that the number of primary conflicts does not depend on CR.
themselves, and not by any naturally occurring interactions
More formally, the first assumption used by CAMDA can be
between aircraft, they are difficult to predict. Therefore, for
stated as:
the purposes of this derivation, t is considered to be a known
c CAMDA Assumption 1:
input parameter. For the conditions studied here, t was found
c
to be between 75-90% of t l , depending on the value of t l . pTA⇢
E. Step3:LocalConflictCountPerUnitDistanceWithoutCR
C 10,wr
⇡
C 10,nr
⇡ 2t c (TV +D nr )
(13)
While the previous steps of the CAMDA framework have As stated above, this assumption was used by Jardin, but
consideredconflictcountsforalltrafficintheairspace(global), it was not verified [10]. The results section of this paper,
this step focuses on determining conflict counts, and conflict on the other hand, will specifically investigate the validity of

--- Page 6 ---

ICRAT 2018
this assumption, and its effect on the final CAMDA capacity
2t (TV +D )
assessment, see section V-A. DEP = c nr 1 (21)
2t (TV +D ) pD TA⇢  
G. Step 5: Total Conflict Count With CR c nr   cdr
As stated before, to compute the DEP, it is necessary to To apply the CAMDA capacity definition, it is useful to
derive a model of the total number of conflicts in an airspace collect together all terms in the above equation that are not
with CR, C . This can be computed by first considering a function of ⇢. To this end,   and   are defined as:
total,wr
the average number of conflicts for a single aircraft with CR,
C , which can in turn be expressed as the product of the
1,wr   = 2t (TV +D ) (22a)
average flight distance with CR, D , and the local conflict c nr
wr 1
count per unit distance with CR, C 10,wr :   = (22b)
pD TA
cdr
C 1,wr =D wr C 10,wr (14)
Using (22), (21) can be rewritten as:
Although C was assumed to be not affected by CR, see
10,wr ⇢
(13), this can not be assumed for D wr . This is because CR DEP = (23)
maneuvers cause aircraft to deviate from their nominal paths,    ⇢
 
and these deviations increase the total distance flown relative
The CAMDA capacity definition, given by (2), can now be
to the case without CR. Therefore, D can be expressed as:
wr evaluated. This involves determining the density at which the
rate of change of the DEP with ⇢ equals infinity:
D =D +D C (15)
wr nr cdr 1,wr
dDEP   
The above equation states that the distance flown by an = = (24)
aircraftwithCRincreaseslinearlywiththenumberofconflicts d⇢ (   ⇢ )2 1
detected. Here, the ‘extra’ distance flown as result of each     ⇢ ! ⇢max   max
Based on (24), it can be seen that the rate of change of the
conflictresolutionmaneuver,includingtheextradistanceflown  
DEPwithdensityequalsinfinityif,andonlyif,   ⇢ =0.
by an aircraft to recover its pre-conflict destination, is denoted   max
Therefore,aninfinitenumberofsecondaryconflictsistriggered
asD .ThisparameterisaffectedbythetypeofCRalgorithm
cdr per primary conflict when ⇢ is equal to   . Using (22):
used, and also by the occurrence of conflict chain reactions. max
As such, D is the sole empirical parameter of the CAMDA
cdr 2t (TV +D )
c nr
method, and therefore its value needs to be determined from ⇢ =   = (25)
max
pD TA
simulation. Substituting (15) into (14) leads to: cdr
This equation shows that ⇢ is directly proportional to
D C max
C = nr 10,wr (16) the ground speed of aircraft, V, and inversely proportional to
1,wr
1
 
D cdr C 10,wr the expected relative velocity between aircraft via the conflict
probability p, see (4). Unsurprisingly, the above equation also
The above equation can be written as a function of ⇢ by
states that ⇢ is dependent on the extra distance flown per
substituting (13) into (16): max
conflict due to CD&R, D , i.e., the empirical parameter of
cdr
pTD nr A⇢ the CAMDA method. Therefore, a value for ⇢ max can be
C 1,wr = (17) determined by fitting simulation logged DEP data to (23) in
2t (TV +D ) pD TA⇢
c nr   cdr a least-squares sense. Thus, even though all parameters used
ThetotalnumberofconflictswithCR,C cannowbe by CAMDA have a physical meaning and take into account
total,wr
computed as the product between C and the total number CD and CR, it is regarded as a semi-empirical method.
1,wr
ofaircraftduringtheanalysistimeintervalwithCR,N :
total,wr IV. FAST-TIMESIMULATIONDESIGN
C =C N (18) To demonstrate the utility of the CAMDA method, as well
total,wr 1,wr total,wr
as to study the effects of CD parameters, CR dimension, and
To formulate N total,wr as a function of ⇢, the following the speed distribution aircraft on airspace capacity, fast-time
assumptionismade;althoughCRisexpectedtoincrease⇢due simulation experiments were performed for a decentralized
to longer flights, CR is also expected to increase the average directroutingen-routeairspaceconcept.Thissectiondescribes
distanceflownbyaproportionalamount.Thus,thetotalnumber the design of these experiments.
of aircraft during the analysis time interval is assumed to be
similar with and without CR, as can be seen when this logic A. Simulation Development
is applied to (11). More formally, the second assumption used 1) Simulation Platform
by the CAMDA framework can be stated as: The BlueSky open-source ATM simulator [14], developed at
CAMDA Assumption 2: TU Delft, was used as the simulation platform in this research.
TV
N totalwr
⇡
N totalnr
⇡
⇢A
D
+1 (19) 2) Airborne Self-Separation Automation
✓ nr ◆ As stated before, state-based CD was used in this study, see
Thevalidityofthisassumptionisalsotestedinthiswork.A section III-C. It should be noted that CD was performed
final expression for C as a function of ⇢ can be derived assuming perfect knowledge of aircraft states. This is in line
total,wr
by substituting (17) and (19) into (18): with the findings of a recent study that concluded that ADS-B
characteristics have little effect on the performance of state-
pTA2⇢2(TV +D nr ) based CD [15].
C = (20)
total,wr 2t (TV +D ) pD TA⇢ Once conflicts occurred, the Modified Voltage Potential
c nr cdr
  (MVP) algorithm was used for CR. MVP works similar to the
H. Step 6: Modeling Capacity Using the DEP repulsion that occurs between similarly charged particles to re-
The final step of the CAMDA framework uses the models solve conflicts between aircraft in a pairwise fashion, resulting
developedaboveforC andC toexpresstheDEP in implicit cooperative resolution strategies. This implies that
total,nr total,wr
asafunctionof⇢.ThisallowstheCAMDAcapacitydefinition all conflicting aircraft shared the task of avoiding intrusions
to be applied, enabling the calculation of the maximum theo- using equal, but opposite, resolution maneuvers. It should be
retical capacity of a given airspace design, ⇢ . Substitution noted that MVP uses minimum-path deviation resolutions, and
max
of (8) and (20) into (1) gives: it was used for cases where CR was limited to either the

--- Page 7 ---

ICRAT 2018
TABLEI
CONDITIONSOFCONFLICTDETECTION(CD)EXPERIMENT
Condition Name S h [NM] S v [ft] t l [mins]
Baseline 2.5 500 5.0
Double Separation 5.0 1000 5.0
Double Separation
5.0 1000 2.5
+ Half Look Ahead
to the horizontal direction. This experiment resulted in a total
Fig.5. Topandsideviewsofthesimulation’sphysicalenvironment
of 600 runs, involving over 850,000 flights.
horizontal or the vertical dimension. For a full description of
the MVP algorithm, the reader is referred to [2], [16]. 2) Conflict Resolution Experiment
After CR, aircraft flew directly to their pre-conflict destina- The second experiment focused on the effect of conflict reso-
tionsinthehorizontaldirection,andrecoveredtheirpre-conflict lution dimension on airspace capacity. Therefore, simulations
altitudesintheverticaldirection.Thismatchesthefunctionality were performed for ten traffic densities using the baseline
of most modern Flight Management Systems (FMS). CD setting for cases where conflict resolution was a) OFF,
b) limited to the horizontal direction (combined heading and
B. Traffic Scenarios ground speed resolutions), and c) limited to the vertical direc-
tion (vertical speed resolutions). For this purpose, the MVP
1) Testing Region and Flight Profiles CR algorithm was used, resulting in a cooperative resolution
A large three-dimensional en-route sector was used as the maneuvers, see section IV-A2. Once again ten repetitions were
physicalenvironmentfortrafficsimulations,seeFig.5.Because performed at each traffic density, and all aircraft flew with an
no traffic was simulated outside the simulated sector, aircraft equal ground speed of 400 kts. This simulation resulted in a
neartheedgesofthe‘simulationregion’areunlikelytogetinto total of 300 simulation runs, using over 425,000 flights.
conflicts. To solve this issue, a smaller cylindrical ‘experiment
region’ was defined in the center of the ‘simulation region’. 3) Ground Speed Experiment
The resulting gap between the experiment and simulation The final experiment considered the effect of the equal speed
regions ensures that aircraft within the experiment region are assumptionthatwasmadeduringthederivationoftheCAMDA
surrounded by traffic in all directions. Correspondingly, only models. Therefore in this experiment, simulations were per-
aircraft within the experiment region, and only conflicts with formedforalltentrafficdensitiesandforcaseswherethespeed
closest points of approach within the experiment region, were distribution of aircraft was a) equal at 400 kts, b) normally
used to assess the accuracy of the CAMDA models. distributed with a mean of 400 kts and a standard deviation
of 16.7 kts, and c) uniformly distributed between 350-450 kts.
Fig.5alsoshowsthehorizontalandverticalflightprofilesof
Once again, each traffic density was repeated 10 times, and
an example flight. Because the simulations consider a direct-
scenarios were repeated with and without CR to calculate the
routing airspace design, aircraft use direct-horizontal routes.
DEP from simulation data. In this experiment resolutions were
Aircraft altitudes were selected to be linearly proportional to
limited to the horizontal direction. This experiment resulted in
their flight distances. Since traffic scenarios with a uniform
a total of 600 runs, involving over 850,000 flights.
distribution of flight distances were used, this method of
altitude selection resulted in a uniform distribution of aircraft
D. Dependent Variables
cruising altitudes.
In addition to studying the effects of CD parameters, CR
2) Scenario Generation
dimension and the speed distribution of aircraft on airspace
Ten traffic demand scenarios of increasing density, ranging
capacity, data collected from the experiments was also used to
between8-80aircraftper10,000NM2intheexperimentregion,
assess the accuracy of the CAMDA modeling approach. The
wereusedforallthreeexperiments.Notethatthisismorethan
specific approach used to measure accuracy varied between
twice the maximum traffic density of 32 aircraft per 10,000
the analytical and semi-empirical components of the CAMDA
NM2 in the upper airspace (>18,000 ft) over the Netherlands
framework. The appropriate methods are discussed with the
in 2017 (computed using logged ADS-B data). Additionally,
corresponding results in the following section.
all traffic scenarios had uniform heading, altitude and spatial
distributions. The speed distribution of aircraft varied between
the three experiments, see section IV-C. V. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
Traffic scenarios were generated with a duration of 2.5 hrs, Inthissection,theresultsofthethreesimulationexperiments
consistingofa1hrtrafficvolumebuildupperiod,a1hrlogging arepresentedanddiscussed.Asstatedbefore,theresultsapply
period, and 0.5 hr wind-down period. Traffic density was held for a decentralized direct-routing en-route airspace design.
constantattherequiredlevelduringtheloggingandwind-down
periods.Itshouldbenotedthatallscenariosweregeneratedoff A. Conflict Detection Experiment
line prior to the simulations so that all independent variables
The goal of the Conflict Detection (CD) experiment is to
could be subjected to the same initial conditions.
study the effect of horizontal and vertical separation require-
ments, and look-ahead time, on the capacity of the airspace,
C. Independent Variables
see Table I. Data gathered from this experiment is also used to
1) Conflict Detection Experiment analyzetheaccuracyofallCAMDAsub-models.Thefollowing
Thegoalofthefirstexperimentwastoinvestigatetheeffectof paragraphs discuss the results of the analytical and the semi-
conflict detection parameters, namely horizontal and vertical empirical components of the CAMDA framework separately.
separation requirements, and look-ahead time, on airspace
capacity. Using different combinations of these three variables, 1) Analytical Model Components
three experiment conditions have been defined, see Table I. Figure 6 displays the simulation results for the analytical com-
Experimentswereperformedforalltentrafficdensities,ranging ponentsoftheCAMDAmethod.Inthisfigure,thescatterpoints
between 8-80 aircraft per 10,000 NM2, using ten random represent the raw data collected from the simulations, and the
initializationsforeachtrafficdensity,andusinganequalground solid lines represent the model predictions for each CAMDA
speed of 400 kts for all aircraft. Furthermore, to calculate the component. To assess the accuracy of analytical models, a
DEP from simulation data, scenarios were repeated with and modelaccuracyparameter,k,isintroduced,asillustratedbelow
withoutCR.Inthisexperimentconflictresolutionswerelimited for a generic case:

--- Page 8 ---

ICRAT 2018
(a) InstantaneousConflictCountWithoutCR (b) TotalConflictCountWithoutCR
(c) LocalConflictCount,BaselineExperiment (d) TotalAircraftCount,BaselineExperiment
Fig.6. Simulationdata(scatter)andmodelpredictions(lines)foranalyticalcomponentsoftheCAMDAframework,ConflictDetection(CD)experiment
The results for C with and without CR are pictured in
10
Fig.6(c).Notethatduetolimitedspace,thefigureonlydisplays
Simulation Measurement=Analytical Model k
⇥ the results for the ‘baseline’ condition; the results of the other
Hereitcanbeseenthatkactsasaconstantscalingparameter conditions are similar. Moreover, the baseline condition led to
to the analytical models. Its value is determined by fitting the the lowest model accuracy, similar to C total,nr .
models to the simulation data in a least-square sense. A value An important assumption made by the CAMDA method to
of k close to 1 indicates high model accuracy, while k < 1 bridge the cases with and without CR is that C 10,wr
⇡
C 10,nr ,
and k > 1 indicates model over- and under-estimation of see (13). Analysis of Fig. 6(c) shows that this assumption is
simulationdata,respectively.Modelaccuracyisalsocomputed true up to a density of approximately 40 aircraft per 10,000
as a percentage by comparing the fitted k to a reference value NM2. But beyond this density, the simulation data indicates
of 1. C 10,wr > C 10,nr . Furthermore, the difference between the
modelpredictionsandthesimulationresultsappearstoincrease
Instantaneous Conflict Count Without CR, C inst,nr beyondthisdensity.Itishypothesizedthatthelargernumberof
TheresultsforC inst,nr aredisplayedinFig.6(a).Thefigure conflict chain reactions that occur at higher densities leads to
showsthattheanalyticalmodel,givenby(3),isabletoclosely a break-down of this assumption; for instance, if such conflict
predictboththeshapeandthemagnitudeofthesimulationdata chains are concentrated in one or more parts of the airspace,
very closely for all densities, and for all CD conditions. This then it is logical that the local conflict count per unit distance
high accuracy is also reflected by k values that are very close with CR would increase relative to the case without CR case.
to 1.0. On comparing the three curves in Fig. 6(a), it can be Regardless,Fig.6(c)indicatesthatthefirstassumptionmade
s th e a e n nt l h o a o t k s - e a p h a e r a a d ti t o i n m r e e . quirementhasagreatereffectonC inst,nr b fo y r t d h e e ns C it A ie M st D h A ata fr r a e m co e m wo p r a k ra , b th le at to C t 1 h 0, e w p r e ⇡ ak C d 1 e 0, n n s r i , ti i e s s o fo n r ly to v d a a l y id s
operations(32aircraftper10,000NM2).Fordensitiesthatare
Total Conflict Count Without CR, C
total,nr approximately three times greater than today, this assumption
Figure 6(b) shows the results for the second model of the
doesnotholdinapurelymathematicalsense.However,because
CAMDA framework, namely C . In contrast to C ,
total,nr inst,nr the absolute difference between model and simulation at the
this figures shows that look-ahead time does not significantly
highestsimulateddensityislessthan5e-7conflictsperaircraft
affect C . This can be explained by the fact that the
total,nr permeter,theviolationofthisassumptionisnotlikelytoaffect
model for C , given by (8), contains look-ahead time, t ,
total,nr l the final CAMDA capacity estimate; at this level of difference,
in the numerator (via the conflict probability, p), and conflict
anaircraftwouldhavetoflymorethananadditional1000NM
duration, t , in the denominator. Since these two parameters
c inthesimulationforittoencounterjustoneadditionalconflict
have similar values, the effect of t on C is, therefore,
l total,nr relativetothemodelpredictionforthebaselinecondition.This
almost ‘canceled-out’.
conclusion is further exemplified model accuracies which are
Although the model curves in Fig. 6(b) closely follow the greater than 85%.
trendbetweenC andtrafficdensity,itisclearthatequa-
total,nr Total Aircraft Count, N
tion(8)slightlyunderestimatesC .Thisisalsoindicated total
total,nr The CAMDA framework assumes that N
byk >1forallconditions.Moreover,themodelaccuraciesfor total,wr
⇡
N .Tovalidatethisassumption,resultsforN forthe
C are lower than for C . This is because CAMDA total,nr total
total,nr inst,nr ‘baseline’ condition are displayed in Fig. 6(d). The results for
usesasequentialframework,andthereforeanymodelingerrors
theothertwoconditionsaresimilar,butarenotshownbecause
will accumulate further down the framework. Nonetheless,
the corresponding model, given by (19), is independent of CD
model accuracy is still approximately 90% for all cases. This
parameters.ThisfigureshowsthatthemodelforN closely
means that equation (8) still provides a good understanding of total
matches the simulation data for the cases with and without
the relationships between the factors that affect C .
total,nr CR. The high accuracy is further emphasized by k values that
Local Conflict Count Per Unit Distance, C are very close to 1. Therefore it can be concluded that the
10

--- Page 9 ---

ICRAT 2018
secondassumptionusedbyCAMDAisvalidforallconsidered Because the DEP model matches well with the simulation
densities. data, it is possible to apply the CAMDA capacity definition,
given by (2), to analyze the effect of CD parameters on the
2) Semi-Empirical Model Components maximum theoretical capacity of the direct-routing airspace
The last two models of the CAMDA framework, namely concept considered here. From a graphical point of view, this
C total,wr and the DEP, are influenced by D cdr . This parameter entails determining the traffic density corresponding to the
describes the extra distance flown by an aircraft to resolve vertical asymptote of the model fitted curves.
each detected conflict. Because D cdr is affected by conflict Using this procedure, ⇢ max for all three CD conditions is
chain reactions, its value can only be determined by fitting the computed, see Fig. 7(c). As for many of the other metrics,
modelforC total,wr ,orthemodelfortheDEP,tothesimulation thisfigureshowsthatseparationrequirementhasasignificantly
datainaleast-squaressense.Sincethesetwomodelsaresemi- greater effect on airspace capacity than look-ahead time. This
empirical, it is not possible to measure model accuracy using trend can be explained by considering equation (25). This
the procedure outlined earlier for the analytical components of equation states that CD parameters affect ⇢ via the conflict
max
the CAMDA framework. probability, p, which is in turn described by (4). The later
Instead, the accuracy of semi-empirical models can be
equationstatesthatadoublingoflook-aheadtime,forinstance,
determined by considering two aspects. The first aspect is would lead to a doubling of p, while a doubling of the
qualitative, and it considers the ability of a model to predict
horizontal and vertical separation requirements would lead
the shape of the relationship between traffic density and the to a quadrupling of p. This effect of CD parameters on p
airspace state of interest, in this case C and the DEP.
total,wr explainstherelativecapacitydifferencesbetweenthethreeCD
This aspect can be studied visually by checking whether the
conditions considered here. This example also illustrates the
shapeofthefittedmodelcurvefollowsthetrendsdisplayedby
utility of the CAMDA method; even though CAMDA is semi-
the raw simulation data.
empirical, because all underlying models and parameters are
The second aspect aims to quantify the accuracy of the
derived with a physical interpretation, the effect of a number
fitting process. To this end, the available simulation data is
of airspace parameters can be directly understood from the
split into two datasets of equal size, known as the ‘training’
structure of the models themselves.
and the ‘validation’ datasets. Only the training dataset is used
to determine the semi-empirical parameters. Subsequently, the
B. Conflict Resolution Experiment
RootMeanSquare(RMS)errorbetweenmodelpredictionsand
the empirical data is computed for both training and validation Thesecondexperimentinvestigatedtheeffectofconflictres-
datasets. If the RMS error for the training data set is small, olutiondimensiononairspacecapacity.Tothisend,simulations
then the fitting accuracy is considered to be high. If the RMS were repeated for the cases where conflict resolution was a)
errors for the training and validation datasets are comparable, limited to the horizontal direction and b) limited to the vertical
then the model fitting process was not significantly affected by direction.
simulation artifacts and noise, i.e, over-fitting was limited. The DEP and capacity results for the CR experiment are
shown in Fig. 8. Here it can be seen that the airspace becomes
Total Conflict Count With CR, C
total,wr
Figure7(a)showstheresultsforC .Thisfigureshows more unstable when vertical conflict resolutions are used. In
total,wr
fact, limiting CR in the vertical direction decreases airspace
thatseparationrequirementhasalargeeffect,whilelook-ahead
timehasaminimaleffect,onC ,atrendalsonotedabove capacity by a factor of three.
total,wr
for C . Furthermore, as the fitted model curves closely Although the horizontal separation requirement is 30 times
total,nr
approximatetheshapeandmagnitudeofthesimulationdata,it larger than the vertical separation minima for the settings used
canbeconcludedthatstructureofequation(20)wellrepresents in this experiment, this unusual result can be explained by
C . considering the horizontal and vertical density distributions
total,wr
To quantify the accuracy of the models fits for C , of aircraft in the airspace. In en-route airspace, aircraft tend
total,wr
Fig. 7(b) displays the RMS errors for the training and val- to be more closely packed in the vertical direction than in
idation datasets. This figure shows that the errors are low the horizontal plane. For example, most long-distance flights
for the ‘baseline’ and for the ‘double separation + half look- cruisebetweenFL300-FL400,whereasaircraftcanbeseparated
ahead’ conditions. However, the RMS errors for the ‘double laterally by many nautical miles. As a result of the closer
separation’ condition is relatively high. On close inspection of packing of aircraft along the vertical direction, vertical conflict
Fig. 7(a), it can be seen that the fitting error for the double resolution maneuvers are more likely to trigger new conflicts,
separationconditionarisesmainlyatthehighesttrafficdensity. andtherefore,moreliketocauseconflictchainreactions.Con-
It is important to consider the magnitude of this fitting error sequently, vertical resolutions reduce the maximum theoretical
in view of the number of conflicts that occurred during the capacity of the airspace.
simulation at this density; an RMS error of 188 conflicts
for the validation dataset of the double separation condition C. Ground Speed Experiment
correspondstoanerrorofonly3%relativetotheactualnumber
To reduce the complexity of the derivation process, the
of conflicts logged at this density. Therefore, while the RMS
modelsdescribedinthispaperassumeequalgroundsspeedsfor
errorsarelargerforthedoubleseparationconditioninarelative
allaircraftintheairspace.Tostudytheeffectofthisassumption
sense, theyare quitelow in theabsolute sense. Forthis reason,
on the accuracy of the CAMDA method, simulations were
the accuracy of the model fits for all CD conditions can be
performedforthecaseswhereaircraftspeedswerea)equal,b)
considered to be high.
normally distributed and c) uniformly distributed.
Domino Effect Parameter (DEP) and Airspace Capacity, ⇢ The DEP and capacity results for the ground speed experi-
max
The results for the DEP, the final and most important com- ment are displayed in Fig. 9. This figure shows no substantial
ponent of the CAMDA framework, are pictured in Fig. 7(c). differences in the DEP for the three speed distributions tested.
As expected, the figure shows that the DEP, which considers Moreover, the CAMDA capacity estimate for the normal and
the occurrence and propagation of conflict chain reactions, uniform distributions are within 5% of the capacity estimated
increases with traffic density for all experiment conditions. for the case where all aircraft flew with equal ground speeds.
Althoughthesimulationresultsforlowtrafficdensitiesarevery This can be explained by the fact that the mean speed of all
noisy, the figure still shows that the model for the DEP, given considered distributions was the same. This result suggests
by (23), is able to well characterize the shape and magnitude that accurate capacity estimates can be computed using the
of the logged simulation data. The high accuracy of the model CAMDA approach as the long as the average speed of all
fittingprocessisfurtherindicatedbythelowRMSerrorsfound aircraft in the airspace is known, regardless of the shape of
for both training and validation datasets, see 7(d). the speed distribution of aircraft.

--- Page 10 ---

ICRAT 2018
(a) TotalConflictCountWithCR (b) RMSErrorofTotalConflictCountWithCR
(c) DominoEffectParameter (d) RMSErrorofDominoEffectParameter
Fig.7. Simulationdata(scatter)andmodelfits(lines)forsemi-empiricalcomponentsoftheCAMDAframework,ConflictDetection(CD)experiment
Itwasfoundthatchangestotrafficseparationrequirements
•
had a greater impact on airspace capacity than changes
to the conflict detection look-ahead time. This is because
separationrequirementshavealargereffectontheaverage
conflict probability between aircraft.
Because aircraft tend to be more closely packed in the
•
vertical direction than in the horizontal direction, cooper-
ative vertical conflict resolution maneuvers cause a larger
numberofconflictchainreactions,decreasingairspaceca-
pacityrelativetocooperativehorizontalconflictresolution
maneuvers.
Usingdifferentspeeddistributionsforaircraftdidnotsig-
Fig.8. DominoeffectparameterandairspacecapacityresultsfortheConflict • nificantly affect the capacity of the direct-routing airspace
Resolution(CR)experiment concept considered in this work. This indicates that accu-
rate capacity estimates can be computed using CAMDA
if the average speed of all aircraft is known.
To further increase CAMDA accuracy, it is recommended
•
to investigate methods to relax modeling assumptions,
particularly an assumption concerning the local conflict
count per unit distance with conflict resolution.
CAMDAreliesontheconflictprobabilitybetweenaircraft
•
to compute the maximum theoretical capacity for decen-
tralized ATC. The conflict probability modeling compo-
nent of CAMDA could be used as a starting point to
develop similar methods for current-day operations. This
will be the topic of future research.
Fig.9. Dominoeffectparameterandairspacecapacityresultsfortheground
speedexperiment As a final note, it is important to realize that CAMDA
determines the absolute maximum theoretical capacity of an
VI. CONCLUSIONS
airspacedesign.Inpractice,however,societywillnotrecognize
This paper presented the derivation of the Capacity Assess- anasymptoticlimitofairspacestabilityasanacceptabledefini-
mentMethodforDecentralizedATC(CAMDA).CAMDAwas tion of airspace capacity. Moreover, airline economics, which
demonstrated in this work using three-dimensional simulations is primarily focused on improving efficiency, and stochastic
ofadecentralizeddirect-routingen-routeairspaceconcept.The effects, such as weather, affect the practical capacity of the
following conclusions can be drawn: airspace.Nevertheless,thetheoreticalcapacitylimitdetermined
byCAMDAcanbeusedasafairandobjectivemetricforcom-
CAMDAdefinesthecapacityoftheairspaceasthedensity
• paring different decentralized airspace designs, and/or CD&R
at which the Domino Effect Parameter (DEP), a measure
algorithms.
of airspace stability, approaches infinity. At this density,
all aircraft in the airspace exist in a persistent state of
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
conflict due to uncontrollable conflict chain reactions.
Fast-time simulation results showed that the underlying The authors would like to thank Junzi Sun, PhD candidate, TU
• Delft,forcalculatingthemaximumtrafficdensityovertheNetherlands
CAMDA models can accurately predict the occurrence
in 2017 using logged ADS-B data. This research would not been
of conflict chain reactions, enabling capacity estimations possiblewithouttheeffortsoftheopen-sourcecommunitythatcontin-
usingrelativelynon-intensivelow-densitytrafficscenarios. ually contributes to the development of the BlueSky ATM simulator.

--- Page 11 ---

ICRAT 2018
BlueSky can be downloaded from https://github.com/ProfHoekstra/
bluesky.
REFERENCES
[1] Performance Review Commission, “Eurocontrol Performance Review
Report2016,”Eurocontrol,Tech.Rep.PRR2016,2016.
[2] J.M.Hoekstra,R.N.H.W.vanGent,andR.C.J.Ruigrok,“Designing
for safety: the free flight air traffic management concept,” Reliability
Engineering&SystemSafety,vol.75,no.2,pp.215–232,Feb.2002.
[3] J. M. Hoekstra, R. C. J. Ruigrok, and R. N. H. W. van Gent, “Free
Flight in a Crowded Airspace?” in Proceedings of the 3rd USA/Europe
AirTrafficManagementR&DSeminar,Naples,Jun.2000.
[4] M. Ballin, J. Hoekstra, D. Wing, and G. Lohr, “NASA Langley and
NLRResearchofDistributedAir/GroundTrafficManagement,”inAIAA
Aircraft Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference,
AIAA-2002-5826,2002.
[5] J.K.KucharandL.C.Yang,“AReviewofConflictDetectionandResolu-
tionModelingMethods,”IEEETransactionsonIntelligentTransportation
Systems,vol.1,pp.179–189,2000.
[6] E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek, J. Hoekstra, A. Vidosavljevic, M. Arntzen,
F.Bussink,andD.Nieuwenhuisen,“AnalysisofAirspaceStructureand
Capacity for Decentralized Separation Using Fast-Time Simulations,”
JournalofGuidance,Control,andDynamics,vol.40,no.1,pp.38–51,
2017.
[7] F.Maracich,“Flyingfreeflight:pilotperspectiveandsystemintegration
requirement,”IEEEAerospaceandElectronicSystemsMagazine,vol.21,
no.7,pp.3–7,Jul.2006.
[8] K.Bilimoria,K.Sheth,H.Lee,andS.Grabbe,“Performanceevaluation
of airborne separation assurance for free flight,” in AIAA Guidance,
NavigationandControlConference,2000.
[9] J.Krozel,M.Peters,andK.Bilimoria,“Adecentralizedcontrolstrategy
fordistributedair/groundtrafficseparation,”inAIAAGuidance,Naviga-
tion,andControlConferenceandExhibit,2000.
[10] M.R.Jardin,“AnalyticalRelationshipsBetweenConflictCountsandAir-
Traffic Density,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 28,
no.6,pp.1150–1156,2005.
[11] Hoekstra,J.,Maas,J.,Tra,M.,andSunil,E.,“HowDoLayeredAirspace
DesignParametersAffectAirspaceCapacityandSafety?”inProceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Research in Air Transportation,
Jun.2016.
[12] Sunil, E., Ellerbroek, J., Hoekstra, J.M., and Maas, J., “Three-
Dimensional Conflict Count Models for Unstructured and Layered
AirspaceDesigns,”submittedtoTransportationResearchPartC:Emerg-
ingTechnologies,Dec.2017.
[13] Sunil, E., rarson, O., Ellerbroek, J., and Hoekstra, J.M., “Analyzing
the Effect of Traffic Scenario Properties on Conflict Count Models,” in
SubmittedtoInternationalConferenceonResearchinAirTransportation
(ICRAT’18),Jun.2018.
[14] J.HoekstraandJ.Ellerbroek,“BlueSkyATCSimulatorProject:anOpen
DataandOpenSourceApproach,”inProceedingsofthe7thInternational
ConferenceonResearchinAirTransportation,Jun.2016.
[15] T. Langejan, E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek, and J. Hoekstra, “Effect of ADS-
B Characteristics on Airborne Conflict Detection and Resolution,” in
Proccedingsofthe6thSesarInnovationDays,2016.
[16] J. M. Hoekstra, “Designing for safety: the free flight air traffic
managementconcept,”PhDDissertation,DelftUniversityofTechnology,
Delft, Nov. 2001. [Online]. Available: http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:
d9f6078a-0961-403f-871e-cad365ee46a9
VViieeww ppuubblliiccaattiioonn ssttaattss