

--- Page 1 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
[EN-A-062] Complexity Analysis of the Concepts of Urban
Airspace Design for METROPOLIS Project
+A. Vidosavljevic*, D. Delahaye*, E. Sunil**, F. Bussink***, J. Hoekstra**
*MAIAA-Applied Mathematics Laboratory
Ecole Nationale de l'Aviation Civile (ENAC)
Toulouse, France
[vidosavljevic | delahaye]@recherche.enac.fr
**Control and Simulation
Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft
Delft, The Netherlands
[e.sunil | j.m.hoekstra]@tudelft.nl
***Cockpit and Flight Operations
National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR)
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
frank.bussink@nlr.nl
Abstract: The world population is expected to grow further with a major increase in population living in urban
areas. Exploiting the door-to-door concept to the full extent, a considerable part of conventional vehicles may be
replaced by personal aerial vehicles. Cargo delivery system will the follow same philosophy using unmanned
aerial vehicles. This brings up completely new challenges for future air traffic management in urban
environments. The Metropolis research project investigates radically new airspace design concepts for the urban
environments 50+ years into the future, which are extreme when compared to today in terms of traffic density,
complexity and constraints. This work presents the results of simulation data analysis and a comparison of
concepts of urban airspace design regarding organizational (complexity) metrics. The aim was to identify how
the structure involved in the concept of urban airspace design influences the complexity of the traffic situation.
In this work geometrical metrics, which are only linked to trajectory structure and not to the system used to
process them, were used to measure complexity. A robust extension of proximity-convergence metrics as a
compound metric has been developed for the ultimate concept evaluation.
Keywords: Future urban airspace design, Traffic complexity, Metropolis, Personal Air Vehicles, Unmanned Air
Vehicle
1. INTRODUCTION density, complexity and constraints. The fundamental,
According to the United Nation Population office, but still practical, question underlying this research is
the world population is expected to grow from 7 billion structure-capacity relation: Does adding structure to the
in 2011 to 9.3 billion in 2050 [1]. What is more critical, airspace design increase or decrease capacity? How
it is expected that the population living in urban areas does it influence traffic complexity, safety or
will be doubled by that time reaching 6.3 billion [1]. efficiency? To have a better understanding of
Exploiting door-to-door concept to full extent, it is alternatives, four extreme concepts have been designed
expected that a considerable part of conventional in the project [6], differing in the terms of structure and
vehicles will be replaced by personal air vehicles (PAV) control involved. Ranging from a free-flight concept
[2]. Amazon, Google, DHL and other’s interested in a with no structure involved, called Full Mix, the level of
future delivery system using unmanned air vehicle structure is gradually increased in the Layers and Zones
(UAV) reveals that cargo delivery will follow same concept until a fully structured concept is reached in the
door-to-door philosophy [3] [4] [5]. This brings up Tubes concept. Proposed concepts were implemented in
completely new challenges for the future Air Traffic a simulation program called Traffic Manager (TMX)
Management (ATM) in urban environments. [7], a medium fidelity desktop simulation application
designed for interaction studies of aircraft in present or
The focus of Metropolis research project has
future ATM environments, and were evaluated under
investigated radically new airspace design concepts for
different scenarios of Metropolis growth. In the end
the urban environments 50+ years into the future, which
are extreme when compared to today in terms of traffic
1

--- Page 2 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
over 6 million flights were simulated for which data was
logged for the post-processing.
This work presents the results of simulation data
analysis and comparison of concepts of urban airspace
design regarding organizational (complexity) metrics.
Section 2 contains brief description of the concept of
urban airspace design, as seen by the members of the
Metropolis project consortium. Next, in section 3 an
overview of the existing complexity metrics will be
presented with description of the metrics used in this
paper for the data analysis. A robust extension of
proximity-convergence metrics as a compound metric
will be also presented here. In section 4 some results of Figure 1: Schematic view of the Layers concept
concept evaluation and analysis, regarding complexity
While flights are still allowed to use direct
of traffic situation they produce, are presented and
(shortest) routes, traffic segmentation reduces
discussed. Finally the main conclusions will be listed in
heterogeneity of the relative velocities between aircraft
section 5.
flying at the same layer, therefore reducing conflict rate.
Remaining conflicts are solved using the same
2. DESIGN OF AIRSPACE CONCEPTS automated ASAS with combined heading and speed
This section contains a brief description of the manoeuvres. Increased safety comes at the price of
airspace concepts design. For the more detailed efficiency, as flights might not be able to use their
description please refer to [6]. optimal altitude.
Since the goal was not to design one ultimate 2.3. Zones concept
concept, but rather investigate the structure-complexity
Zones concept takes a further step in segmentation
relation, four concepts have been proposed: Full Mix,
of the airspace compared to the Layers concept. It is
Layers, Zones and Tubes, with increasing structure in
based on the principle that traffic is homogeneous in
mind, from the one with no structure involved up to a
different zones of airspace in which traffic moves at
fully structured airspace.
the same speed and follows the same global
2.1. Full Mix concept direction.
Underlying assumption of this concept, that any A distinction is made between circular and radial
structuring of traffic flows decreases overall efficiency zones (Fig. 2). Circular zones are similar to ring roads
of the system, is justified by the fact that traffic demand and allow journeys in the outer area of the city. Radial
in the future urban environment will most likely be zones serve as connections between these concentric
unstructured (door-to-door philosophy). Moreover, Free zones and enables traffic to travel to and away from the
Flight research had shown that today, spreading the city centre. Each zone is unidirectional as shown in the
traffic in airspace results in fewer conflicts, which are figure. Both types of zones segment airspace only in the
easy to solve by cockpit crew assisted by an Airborne horizontal plane, meaning that flights may use their
Separation Assurance System (ASAS), which alerts and optimal altitude. The horizontal path is computed at
advises the crew [8]. pre-tactical level using the A* shortest path algorithm.
ASAS manoeuvres consists of speed and altitude
In the Full Mix concept, aircraft are therefore
change in that order of priority.
permitted to use the direct path between origin and
destination, as well as optimum flight altitudes and
velocities, thus reducing flight costs. Tactical control of
the traffic is handled, in decentralized fashion, by an
automated ASAS developed in [9], allowing three types
of resolution manoeuvres: heading, altitude and speed
change, that ensures conflict-free trajectories.
2.2. Layers concept
Based on existing principle of hemispheric flight
levels, airspace in the Layers concept is separated into
Figure 2: Top view of the Zone topology
different vertical bands (layers) that limit allowed
heading ranges (Fig. 1).
2

--- Page 3 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
much the system is invariant to changes in the initial
conditions and also external influences.
3.2. Overview of existing metrics
Research into air traffic complexity metrics has
attracted considerable attention in recent years.
Proposed models can be grouped into two groups: the
first one focused on the air traffic control officer
(ATCo) workload, and the second one focus on traffic
complexity using automatic conflict resolution
Figure 3: Fixed route Tubes concept topology
algorithms.
2.4. Tubes concept The first group of models has the objective to
Finally, the Tubes concept represents a fully model the control workload associated with given traffic
structured airspace concept that is based on assumption situations. The main approaches are as follows. In the
that by providing conflict-free 4D tubes for each flight model based on traffic level [11], the workload is
at pre-tactical level, both safety and efficiency of the defined as the proportion of control time (duration of
flight could be increased. control actions taken to resolve conflicts) over an hour.
The queue-based model [12] considers a control sector
In the Metropolis implementation of the Tubes
as a system supplying service and the queuing theory is
concept a fixed route system has been designed, and
used to determine the maximum acceptable arrival rate
time-based separation is used to have pre-planned
for a sector. Models based on airspace structure [13]
conflict free routes. Tubes topology is based on a
[14] estimate the capacity and complexity of a sector
diagonal grid layout consisting of edges (tubes) and
based solely on its structure (flight levels, routes, route
vertices (nodes) as on Fig. 3. In order to take advantage
intersections, etc.). In the context of operational control,
of the 3D airspace, a number of tube levels of
the ideal option would be to find a metric which
decreasing granularity are foreseen. For route planning,
precisely measures the cognitive difficulty to manage a
the A* depth-first search algorithm is used to plan the
certain situations. There are various reviews that have
shortest trajectory from origin to destination, prior to
been studying factors that impact upon controller
departure.
workload and their relation to the workload experienced
by a controller. The list of factors includes a number of
3. COMPLEXITY METRICS traffic and airspace characteristics like: total number of
This section presents the overview of the existing airplanes, minimum distance between airplanes, number
complexity metrics and describes metrics used in the of changes in direction, speed and altitude, number of
Metropolis project to compare different concepts of predicted conflicts, etc. In NASA, the Dynamic density
urban airspace design. model [15] [16] [17] has been developed as a weighted
sum of traffic complexity factors. In [18] a multivariate
3.1. Scope analysis based upon simulation modelling is proposed.
Future urban transport is a safety critical system However, the listed models are not generalized and are
and maintaining safe separation between vehicles and linked to, and limited to, a specific sector structure and
with other obstacles is imperative for the system. When also sensitive to controllers used to infer the model.
a conflict is detected, a resolution process is launched Other approaches [19] [20] model the complexity
which, in certain situations, may generate new conflicts. of a traffic situation using automatic conflict resolution
This interdependency between conflicts is linked to the algorithms, for which the number of trajectory
level of mixing between trajectories. In addition, modifications required in processing a given situation is
uncertainty with respect to positions and speeds measured. These methods are highly dependent on the
increases the difficulty of predicting future trajectories. type of algorithm used to resolve conflicts.
The difficulty to control a system depends on both its
Airspace concepts, presented in section 2, differ in
sensitivity to initial conditions and interdependency of
the level of structure and in the way how the system is
conflicts [10].
managed and controlled. For this reason, previously
One of the research goals of the Metropolis listed approaches are not suitable as it is necessary to
projects was to identify how the structure involved in use an intrinsic traffic complexity metric that is only
the concepts influence the complexity of the traffic linked to trajectory structure, and not to the system used
situation. Measuring and comparing complexity of the to process them. In the next section some geometrical
resulting traffic situations, it is implicitly possible to metrics, presented in [10] [21], are studied and a robust
compare how difficult it is to control a given system. In extension of proximity-convergence metric will be
addition measuring the robustness will determine how elaborated.
3

--- Page 4 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
a) b)
Figure 5: Converging/Diverging airplanes example [10]
Figure 4: Two situations of spatial distribution of airplanes [10]
For the given time and for each airplane under
3.3. Geometrical approaches
consideration, we open a spatial weighting window
These metrics are calculated at a given instant cantered on that airplane. Then, a complexity metric
using the positions and speed vectors of airplanes associated with referenced airplane, as in (3), is
present in the chosen geographical zone. Each of these calculated adding together factors of all pairs of
geometrical metrics exhibits a particular characteristic airplanes in the reference window.
associated with the complexity of the situation.
∑
3.3.1. Proximity indicator (3)
The proximity indicator is used to characterize the
3.3.4. Robust extension of the metric
geographical distribution of airplanes in the given
volume of airspace. It allows us to identify spatial zones The geometrical approaches presented so far use
with high levels of aggregation in relation to their noiseless observations, allowing us to generate
volume. Thus, for a constant number of airplanes in a instantaneous metrics. Due to possible changes in initial
sector, proximity is used to distinguish whether these conditions (delay) and external issues (wind,
planes are distributed homogeneously (Fig. 4a) or in the disruptions, regulations, etc.), the stochastic aspect of
form of clusters (Fig. 4b). observations needs to be taken into account in order to
generate reliable (robust) metrics. To do this, trajectory
For two airplanes and , the proximity is
observations, computed through simulation using a set
calculated by weighting coefficient given in formula (1).
of flight plans, are affected by noise, particularly in the
( ) , (1) temporal dimension. In the context of stochastic process
theory, this phenomenon is known as clock shifting:
where is a parameter fixed by the user, and is
“the trajectory continues to conform to the flight plan in
normalized distance1 between airplanes.
the spatial dimension, but the position of the vehicles on
3.3.2. Convergence indicator the trajectory may be subject to significant deviations in
the temporal dimension [22]”.
The convergence indicator is used to quantify the
geometric structure of the speed vectors of airplanes in A robust complexity metric for a given airplane at
the given volume of airspace. Thus, for identical a given time is computed taking into account all
proximity values, the convergence indicator allows us to possible pairs of trajectory samples of observed
distinguish between converging and diverging airplanes airplanes existing in spatiotemporal window centred on
(Fig. 5). referenced airplane (Fig. 6). Red lines in the figure
indicate all possible pairs of samples for planes and .
For two airplanes and , the level of variation of
Complexity associated with an airplane with respect to
their relative distance is given by the formula (2), and
they converge if, and only if, this level of variation is plane at a given time is computed as an time
averaging of the proximity-convergence metric over all
negative.
pairs of samples ( ) and it is given
( )
⃗ ⃗⃗
, (2) by formula (4).
w
ve
h
c
e
t
r
o
e
r s
⃗
r e s p
an
ec
d
t i v
⃗
e l y
r
.
e present relative position and speed
∑ ∑ (4)
3.3.3. Proximity-convergence metric
where and represent variation of relative
In reality, the risk associated with the convergence
of a pair of airplanes also depends on the relative distance and normalized distance of airplane at the
distance between them [21]. We must, therefore, time and airplane at the time , while is
simultaneously account for the speeds and relative number of sample pairs.
distances of each pair of airplanes.
1 Due to the fact that separation norms are not the same in the
horizontal and vertical planes distance is normalized by their value
(e.g. 5NM and 1000ft)
4

--- Page 5 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
the effect of the airspace structure itself on the
⃗⃗⃗⃗ ⃗ ⃗⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ operations: structure’s vehicle separation ability.
Finally, taking into account that a probabilistic
⃗⃗⃗⃗
distribution function is used for flight’s origin-
⃗⃗⃗⃗ ⃗ ⃗⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ destination pair computation, there were two repetitions
of each designed scenario. In the end over 6 million
⃗⃗⃗ ⃗ ⃗ ⃗⃗⃗ ⃗⃗
⃗⃗⃗⃗ ⃗ ⃗⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ flights were simulated for which data was logged for
processing.
⃗⃗⃗⃗
For more detail about simulation platform, design
⃗⃗⃗⃗ ⃗ ⃗⃗⃗ ⃗⃗
of the Metropolis city and traffic scenarios please refer
to [6].
⃗⃗⃗⃗
4.2. Results
⃗⃗⃗⃗ ⃗ ⃗⃗⃗ ⃗⃗ Due to the fact that there are many independent
scenario variables: traffic volume, period of the day,
usage of ASAS, to analyse their effects it is necessary to
Figure 6: Spatiotemporal window perform multiple tests for which all except one variable
for the reference airplane ⃗⃗ and time would be fixed. Following sub-sections present the most
relevant results of the concepts evaluation.
A robust complexity metric associated with
airplane is computed as the sum over all pairs of 4.2.1. Comparison according to traffic volume
observed planes in the spatiotemporal window by (5). For this analysis all concepts have been compared
according to four different traffic density levels: low,
∑
(5) medium, high and ultra-high density, with ASAS
enabled. Resulting complexity, for each concept-density
Finally, the complexity of the given traffic pair, is the average of the six scenarios: three periods of
situation at a given time is then calculated using the sum the day with two repetitions.
of the robust complexity metrics of the airplanes present Number of flights for each traffic density slightly
in that geographical zone for the given time. differs depending on the period of the day and
simulation repetition as a result of different demand
patterns. Flight plans on average had 11,790 flights in
4. SIMULATION DATA ANALYSIS
low, 15,416 flights in medium, 18,550 flights in high,
To compare the four airspace concepts in terms of
and 21,784 flights in ultra-high density scenario. Due to
complexity, large-scale simulation experiments were
Tubes concept ability to delay or cancel a flight before
performed. Proposed concepts were implemented in a
take-off, in cases where there is no available space for a
simulation platform called Traffic Manager (TMX) [7],
route clearance with sufficient spacing to ensure a
a medium fidelity desktop simulation application
conflict-free route, number of flights for Tubes concept
designed for interaction studies of aircraft in present or
is always lower compared to other concepts. To be able
future ATM environments, developed by NLR.
to compare the results of different concepts, computed
4.1. Experiment design complexity metric is divided by the total number of
flight of respected scenario.
The Metropolis scenarios were designed for a
fictional city based on the present-day Paris 50 years in Fig. 7 shows the full complexity distribution (min,
the future. Similar to other modern cities, the zoning max, median values and interquartile range – IQR) for
also applies to the fictional Metropolis city that is four airspace concepts and four traffic volumes.
divided into three major districts: city centre, inner ring
and outer ring, with specific land-use.
Based on different predictions of the population
growth (14-26 million) and travel demand assumptions,
four scenarios were computed differing in the traffic
volume: low, medium, high and ultra-high volume
scenario. In addition to multiple traffic volumes, using
business and residential zones, different traffic demand
patterns were experienced during course of the day,
respectively: morning, lunch and evening period
scenario. Furthermore, the scenarios were simulated
with and without the ASAS enabled, in order to study
Figure 7: Complexity min, max value and IQR
in function of traffic volume
5

--- Page 6 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
Figure 9: Layers concept convergence-proximity graph
Figure 8: Complexity metric average value for the lunch period and different traffic volumes
in function of traffic volume
Having in mind the initial idea of the Tubes
The main conclusion, drawn from Fig. 7, is that concept to design conflict-free 4D route of the flights at
traffic complexity, as expected, increases with traffic pre-tactical level (when flights are spawned), one could
density for all concepts. The relationship between expect that Tubes concept performs the best in the terms
complexity and density is described by power function of the traffic complexity. Taking into account absolute
as on Fig. 8. Figure shows almost quadratic relation values of the complexity, indeed, Tubes concept result
between complexity and density for all concepts except in traffic situation with lowest complexity. Due to flight
Zones concept. Zones has a steeper complexity function cancelation, however, Tubes had the lowest traffic
as a result of the Zones structure saturation at the higher volume, which in turn results in higher complexity
traffic volumes. The complexity increase for all value per flight.
concepts is caused by increase of both: proximity and
Finally, the Zones concept had significantly poorer
convergence, as shown in the Fig. 9 for the Layers
performance regarding complexity compared to other
concept2. This is explained by the fact that, with
concepts. The explanation for this is in the Zones
increase in traffic volume for the same airspace volume,
concept structure design that consists of concentric rings
vehicles come geographically closer increasing
and radials. The radials converge to the city centre
proximity metric, while trajectory intersections, that are
causing higher concentration (higher proximity) of the
greater in number, increase convergence metric.
traffic in the core city area. In addition, traffic is
Another observation from the Fig. 7 is the order of structured only in the horizontal dimension and not
concepts sorted by the increasing level of complexity: separated in the third dimension creating high
Layers, Full Mix, Tubes and Zones, that is preserved convergence areas around structural crossing points
with traffic volume. The order is based on comparison (ring and radial intersections). This effect is more
of average and median complexity values, which is expressed at the higher traffic densities. It is expected
relevant taking into account size of the confidence that a different Zones concept design might result in a
intervals that are rather small. better traffic complexity. However, a general conclusion
is that the introduction of the higher structure into
Layers and Full Mix concepts are both based on
airspace without the involvement of traffic management
direct routing principle, with the difference that in the
in general results in the higher traffic complexity.
Layers concept cruising altitude is prescribed for a
given heading. The fact that at each flight level, in the The order of the concepts sorted by the increasing
Layers concept, flights are homogeneous in flight level of complexity doesn’t change when robustness is
direction reduces flight convergence compared to Full included, as in Fig. 10. Results show a correlation
Mix concept. In addition, choice of cruising level, based between traffic density and robust complexity that
on flight direction, increases the usage extent of the increases with density, similarly to the general metrics
vertical dimension of the airspace. Additional vertical case. Although order of concepts is not changed, Tubes
separation of flights reduces the traffic proximity, which concept complexity increases the most when robust
in combination with lower convergence result in lower metric is used. This leads to conclusion that Tubes
traffic complexity for Layers concept than Full Mix concept has lower level of robustness compared to other
concept. concepts and therefore is more influenced by changes in
the initial conditions (delay in particular). Additionally,
performance of the Layers concept is decreased at the
higher traffic volumes compared to Full Mix concept,
and the two concepts are very similar when robustness
is considered.
2 Similar figures are found for other concepts and other period of day.
6

--- Page 7 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
Concepts that doesn’t regulate flights before
take-off (ground delay program), like Full Mix, Layers
and Zones, experience, in general, higher traffic
complexity with the increase of supply of commercial
areas. Due to inability to separate flights before take-off,
high commercial areas supply results in high traffic
density in the city centre immediately after flight
departure, increasing complexity of traffic situation.
This is even more expressed for the Zones concept with
a fixed structure that reduces set of allowed conflict
resolution manoeuvres types. Although there is a high
demand for the commercial areas in the morning period,
Figure 10: Robust complexity min, max value and IQR
the resulting traffic complexity for the Zones is lower
in function of traffic volume
compare to the evening period as flights are partly
4.2.2. Comparison according to period of the day sequenced by the structure before reaching the core city
For this analysis, all concepts have been compared area (Fig. 12).
according to three rush-hour periods of the day: As opposite, the complexity of the Tubes concept
morning, lunch and evening period with ASAS enabled. doesn’t increase with increase of commercial areas
As in previous analysis, complexity value for each supply. This is explained with the ability of Tubes to
concept-period pair is the average of the eight scenarios: delay a flight before take-off in order to ensure a
four densities with two repetitions. In order to scale it, conflict-free route. However, decrease of the Tubes
final complexity metric is divided by the total number traffic complexity is the result of rejected flights for
of flight of respected scenario. which a conflict free 4D route wasn’t available at the
Morning period is characterized by a high demand time when they had been spawned.
for the commercial areas (people going to work) 60% of
flights. This cause high inbound traffic in the morning
as business areas are mostly located in the core city
centre. As a difference, evening period is characterized
by a high supply of commercial areas: commercial-
residential (e.g. people going home) 55% of traffic and
commercial-commercial (e.g. people going shopping
after work) 20%, causing high outbound traffic. Finally
lunch period has a more balanced demand patterns
compared to other two periods.
Fig. 11 shows full the complexity distribution (min,
max, median values and interquartile range – IQR) for
four airspace concepts and three periods of the day. The
first conclusion is that the order of the concepts sorted
by the increasing level of complexity doesn’t change a) Evening
with the period of the day and is the same as the order
shown in previous analysis: Layers, Full Mix, Tubes
and Zones. However complexity for all concepts
changes with the period of the day caused by different
traffic demand patterns.
b) Morning
Figure 12: Zones concept complexity map
of the most complex traffic situation
Figure 11: Complexity min, max value and IQR
in function of period of the day
7

--- Page 8 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
Figure 13: Complexity min, max value and IQR Figure 14: Robust complexity min, max value and IQR
with/without ASAS enabled for different traffic volumes with/without ASAS enabled for different traffic volumes
4.2.3. Effects of the ASAS Fig. 14 shows a summary of the concept
comparison using robust complexity metric. The most
All the previous analyses are based on simulated
distinct difference compared to general metric case is
data with ASAS enabled. This section studies the effects
that traffic complexity increase slightly, if at all, without
of ASAS itself on the traffic complexity. Concepts are
ASAS. The explanation is in the fact that although the
compared according to traffic density with and without
flight intrusions are more severe without ASAS, due to
ASAS enabled. Darker colours in the figures (left bars)
domino effect (new conflicts that are result of previous
represent scenarios with ASAS enabled; while lighter
conflict resolution manoeuvres) there is greater number
(right bars) represent scenarios without ASAS enabled.
of conflicts detected when ASAS is enabled. Greater
Complexity values are averaged over different periods
number of conflict resolution manoeuvres results in
of the day and repetitions.
traffic situation that is less predictable therefore harder
Fig. 13 shows a summary of the concept
to control. This increases complexity with ASAS
comparison using general complexity metric. The
enabled when robustness is included. Traffic situation
general conclusion is that complexity increases if
without ASAS is more predictable and therefore more
conflicts remain unsolved. This is expected as in
robust.
conflicts aircrafts come closer together which the
Further, at the higher traffic densities, robust
increases traffic proximity. Also intersecting routes in
complexity for the Zones without ASAS is even lower
conflicts cause higher convergence of the traffic. In total
than when ASAS is enabled. There are two reasons for
this results in a higher traffic complexity.
this behaviour. The first is Zone structure that reaches
Therefore Tubes concept is unaffected by the
its limits at the higher densities. And the second is
ASAS, since traffic separation is maintained in the route
CD&R algorithm that is unable to properly solve
planning phase and therefore there are no additional
conflicts, due to limited set of available manoeuvres for
conflicts left to be solved by the ASAS. The order of
the Zones, and fault coordination with traffic merging
remaining concepts sorted by the increasing level of
algorithm.
complexity remains almost unchanged when ASAS is
disabled: Layers, Full Mix and Zones. For all three
concepts, there is around 70% increase of traffic 5. CONCLUSIONS
complexity without ASAS for the low traffic volume Based on the different scenarios and the different
and the percentage decreases with increase of traffic complexity metrics the following conclusions are made.
volume. This means that efficiency of the ASAS is
When general metrics are considered, list of the
decreased with increase of traffic density (once volume
concepts ordered by increasing level of complexity is as
approaches airspace capacity).
follows: Layers, Full Mix, Tubes and Zones concept.
Additionally, it is observed that Full Mix concept This order is preserved at all periods of the day and for
performance is improved compared to Layers with the all traffic densities.
increase of traffic density without ASAS. This is
The traffic complexity increase due to traffic
reasonable, since the traffic is more distributed over
density shows an almost quadratic relation for all
available airspace in the fully unstructured concepts
concepts except Zones. Concepts without flight
(like Full Mix) compared to structured concepts, when
regulation before take-off (Full Mix, Layers and Zones)
there is no control of the traffic (pre-departure delay,
experience higher traffic complexity with the increase
ASAS, etc.).
of commercial areas supply (evening period).
8

--- Page 9 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
Tubes performance apparently increases with ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
increase of commercial areas supply due to increased This research received funding from the Seventh
number of rejected flight for which a conflict free 4D Framework Programme of the European Commission
route wasn’t available at the time when they had been under grant number 341508 (Metropolis).
spawned.
The authors would like to thank other participants
The order of the concepts is not changed when in the Metropolis project: Bruno Lamiscarre, Georges
robust complexity metric is considered. Even thought, Mykoniatis (ENAC), Joost Ellerbroek (TUD), Dennis
Tubes concept is the most influenced by the robust Nieuwenhuisen, Pim van Leeuwen, Roalt Aalmoes,
complexity metric. This is due to the fact that robustness Marieke Suijkerbuijk (NLR), Oliver Schneider, Stefan
considers the stochastic aspect of observations which Kern (DLR) for their valuable contribution to: the
are affected by the noise, particularly in the temporal design of the concepts and their implementation,
dimension. Since time is the main method of flight assistance with the execution of the simulation runs,
separation in the Tubes concept, the fixed 3D structure metrics definition, and helping with project
causes an additional convergence of the flights rather management tasks.
than separating flights. This leads to conclusion that
Tubes concept has lower level of robustness compared
to other concepts and therefore is more influenced by
REFERENCES
changes in the initial conditions (delay in particular). [1] United Nations, Department of Economic and
Additionally, performance of the Layers concept is Social Affairs, Population Division, "World
decreased at the higher traffic volumes compared to Full Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, Report
Mix concept.
No. ESA/P/WP.24 1," United Nations, New York,
The Full Mix, Layers and Zones concepts show an 2015.
almost proportional increase (around 70%) in
complexity when ASAS is disabled. The efficiency of
[2] E. Kolawole, "The flying car: Are we there yet?,"
the ASAS is decreased with increase of traffic density
The Washington Post, 2012.
(once volume approaches airspace capacity). Due to
domino effect, there is greater number of conflict
detected when ASAS is enabled, and accordingly there [3] P. Misener, "Amazon PrimeAir: Petition for
is greater number of conflict resolution manoeuvres. As Exemption to FAA," Amazon.com, 2014.
a result traffic situation is less predictable with ASAS,
therefore less robust and harder to control. On the other
[4] G. Warwick, "Google details Project Wing:
hand, traffic situation without ASAS is more predictable
Unmanned Package-Delivery R&D," Aviation
and therefore more robust.
Week & Space Technology, 3 Nov 2014.
The final conclusion is that, regarding complexity,
the less structured concept, like Layers and Full Mix,
[5] DHL, "DHL pacelocopter Press release: DHL
performs better than structured concepts. This result is
parcelcopter launches initial operations for research
independent to the test scenarios and the complexity
metrics used in the analysis. Taking into account purposes," DHL Global, 2014.
performed tests, the Layers concept was chosen as the
best concept regarding complexity. Its performance [6] E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek, J. Hoekstra, F. Bussink, D.
remains stable for all periods of the day and all traffic Nieuwenhuisen, A. Vidosavljevic and S. Kern,
densities. Therefore, it represents a good balance
"Metropolis: Relating Airspace Structure and
between a fully unstructured and a structured concept,
Capacity for Extreme Traffic Densities," in 11th
where the structure involved separates flights compared
USA/EUROPE Air Traffic Management R&D
to the unstructured concept (Full Mix) but doesn’t cause
a traffic concentration as in structured concepts (Zones, Seminar (ATM2015), Lisboa, Portugal, 2015.
Tubes). However it shows less robustness at higher
traffic densities compared to Full Mix concept, which
requires further testing.
9

--- Page 10 ---

ENRI Int. Workshop on ATM/CNS. Tokyo, Japan. (EIWAC 2015)
[7] F. Bussink, J. Hoekstra and B. Heesbeen, "Traffic [15] I. Laudeman, S. Shelden and R. Branstorm,
manager: a flexible desktop simulation tool "Dynamic density: an air traffic management
enabling future ATM research," in 24th Digital metric," NASA, 1998.
Avionics Systems Conference (DASC'05), vol. 1,
pp. 3-B, 2005. [16] B. Sridhar, K. Seth and S. Grabbe, "Airspace
complexity and its application in air traffic
[8] J. Hoekstra, R. Ruigrok and R. van Gent, "Free management," in Proceedings of the US Europe
Flight in a Crowded Airspace?," in 3rd ATM Seminar, Santa Fe, NM, USA, 2001.
USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D
Seminar (ATM2000), Naples, 2000. [17] G. Chatterji and B. Sridhar, "Measure for air traffic
controller workload prediction," in Proceedings of
[9] J. Hoekstra, R. van Gent and R. Ruigrok, the 1st AIAA Aircraft Technology, Integration, and
"Designing for safety: the 'free flight' air traffic Operation Forum, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2001.
management concept," Reliability Engineering and
System Safety, no. 75, pp. 215-232, 2002. [18] A. Majumdar and W. Y. Ochieng, "The factors
affecting air traffic controller workload: a
[10] D. Delahaye and S. Puechmorel, Modeling and multivariate analysis based upon simulation
Optimization of Air Traffic, London: Wiley-ISTE, modelling of controller workload," Imperial
2013. College, London, 2000.
[11] D. Schmidt, "A queuing analysis on the air traffic [19] G. Granger and N. Durand, "A traffic complexity
controller’s workload," IEEE Transactions on approach trough cluster analysis," in Proceedings
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 8, pp. 492- of the US Europe ATM Seminar, Budapest,
498, 1978. Hungary, 2003.
[12] L. Maugis and J. Gotteland, "Techniques de [20] K. Lee, E. Feron and A. Prichett, "Air traffic
détermination de la capacité des secteurs de complexity: an input-output approach," in
contrôle de l’espace aérienne: statistiques et Proceedings of the US Europe ATM Seminar,
simulations," Centre d’études de la navigation Barcelona, Spain, 2007.
aérienne, France, 1997.
[21] D. Delahaye and S. Puechmorel, "Air traffic
[13] M. Janic and V. Tosic, "En route sector capacity complexity: Toward intrinsic metrics," in 3rd
model," Transportation Science, vol. 25, no. 4, USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D
1991. Seminar, Napoli, 2000.
[14] F. Netjasov, M. Janic and V. Tosic, "Developing a [22] D. Delahaye and S. Puechmorel, "Air traffic
generic metric of terminal airspace traffic complexity based on Dynamical systems," in 49th
complexity," Transportmetrica, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. IEEE Conference on Decision and Control
369-394, 2011. (CDC2010), Atlanta, 2010.
10