

--- Page 1 ---

Effect of ADS-B Characteristics on Airborne
Conflict Detection and Resolution
Thom Langejan, Emmanuel Sunil, Joost Ellerbroek and Jacco Hoekstra
Control and Simulation, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering
Delft University of Technology, 2628 HS Delft, The Netherlands
Abstract—MostFree-Flightconceptsrelyonself-separationby as system and situation related deficiencies. System related
means of airborne Conflict Detection and Resolution (CD&R) limitations affect the accuracy of the transmitted state infor-
algorithms.AkeyenablingtechnologyforairborneCD&Risthe
mation. This is not only affected by the accuracy of on-board
Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) system,
sensors, but also by the number of bits available for (digital)
which is used for direct state information exchange between
aircraft. Similar to other communication systems, ADS-B is dataencoding.Ontheotherhand,situationrelateddeficiencies
affected by a number of limitations which can be broadly reduce ADS-B message detect and decode probability due to
classified as system and situation related deficiencies. This re- the distance between aircraft and due to signal interference
searchinvestigatestheimpactoftheselimitationsontheviability
[4]. Previous researchers have modeled these situation related
of using ADS-B for airborne CD&R within the Free-Flight
effects, discussed in [4], [5].
context. Here, ‘state-based’ conflict detection and the modified
voltagepotentialconflictresolutionalgorithmareusedasacase-
Despitetheselimitations,muchofthepreviousworkonair-
study. An ADS-B model is developed, and its effect on the
aforementioned CD&R method is measured using three fast- borne CD&R, particularly studies related to the development
time simulation experiments. The experiments studied overall of novel conflict resolution methods [1], [6], have assumed
safety with ADS-B, as well as the specific effect of situation perfect state information exchange between aircraft. Thus, it
related characteristics, i.e., transmission range and interference,
is as yet unknown whether the ADS-B system is actually
onsafety.TheresultsindicatedthattheoverallsafetywithADS-
capable of providing usable state information for airborne
B was comparable to the case where perfect state information
was assumed. Additionally, it was found that increasing ADS- CD&R purposes. Furthermore, the extent to which the safety
B transmission range also increased signal interference, which of CD&R methods is affected by ADS-B limitations is also
in turn lowered safety. This suggests that the degrading effect unknown.
of ADS-B signal interference should be considered in future
airborne CD&R research, particularly for high traffic densities. The research that is presented in this paper represents the
initial work done towards understanding the effect of ADS-B
Index Terms—ADS-B, Free Flight, Conflict Detection and
onself-separationsafetybyfocusingononeparticularairborne
Resolution (CD&R), Modified Voltage Potential (MVP), Air
CD&R method. Given the plethora of CD&R methods, the
Traffic Management (ATM), Safety, Self-Separation, BlueSky
ATM Simulator frequentlyused‘state-based’ConflictDetection(CD)method,
andtheModifiedVoltagePotential(MVP)ConflictResolution
I. INTRODUCTION (CR) algorithm, have been selected as a case-study. An ADS-
B model is developed, and its effect on state-based CD and
The Free-Flight Air Traffic Management (ATM) concept
the MVP CR algorithm are measured using three fast-time
has been proposed as a means of increasing airspace safety,
simulation experiments. The goal of the first experiment is
efficiency and capacity by permitting user defined trajectories
to determine the overall safety with ADS-B. To this end, an
[1], [2]. Most Free-Flight concepts rely on self-separation
ABS-B system based on Minimum Operational Performance
using airborne Conflict Detection and Resolution (CD&R)
Specifications(MOPS)[7]iscomparedtoonethatisbasedon
automation. As airborne CD&R requires information sharing
measuredactualperformance[8],andtothecasewhereperfect
between aircraft, a system for inter-aircraft communication is
state information is used. The second and third experiments
required. In Free-Flight literature, this information sharing is
focus on the specific effect of situation related characteristics,
often achieved using the Automatic Dependent Surveillance-
i.e., transmission range and interference, on safety.
Broadcast (ADS-B) system. Aircraft equipped with ADS-B
transmittersperiodicallybroadcasttheirownstateinformation, This paper is organized as follows. An overview of the Au-
such as position and velocity, using data obtained from on- tomatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) system
board sensors. Aircraft can also receive this information from and its model derivation is described in Section II. Details
neighboring traffic, which can in turn be used for detecting of the three experiments used to study the safety impact of
and resolving conflicts [3]. ADS-B, as well as a description of the Conflict Detection &
Similar to other data-link systems, ADS-B has a number Resolution (CD&R) method used are presented in Section III.
of limitations that affect the quality of the transmitted and re- The results are presented and discussed in Section IV. This
ceivedinformation.Theselimitationscanbebroadlyclassified paper ends with the main conclusions in Section V.
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands

--- Page 2 ---

2
d=R·c (1c)
II. ADS-BMODEL
Using the Haversine function and a position described in
In this research, the focus is on the airborne ADS-B link be- longitude and latitude with a six digit significance level
tween aircraft, enabled by ADS-B IN/OUT. ADS-B transmits results in a accuracy ranging from 9 to 17 m, depending on
specificstateinformationinanomnidirectionalmanner,called the location on the earth.
squitter. The following different type of squitter messages
exist, with their corresponding transmission rate: State Accuracy:
• Airborne positions squitter (2 Hz) In addition to the truncation effect, the accuracy of the
• Surface position squitter (1 Hz) on-board measurement sensors affects the location precision.
• Airborne velocity squitter (2 Hz) Location is determined using the Global Navigation
• Aircraft identification squitter (0.2 Hz) Surveillance System (GNSS). In [9] it is found that a GPS
• Operational Status (0.4 Hz) measurement has an accuracy of ≤7.8 meter with a 95%
• Target state (0.8 Hz) confidence interval.
ThemessagesaretransmittedusingPulsePositionModula-
tion(PPM)onthe1090MHzcarrierfrequency.Eachmessage Latency:
contains 120 bits and is transmitted at 1 Mbps, resulting in a A latency of 20 milliseconds in the ADS-B system is
message duration of 120 µs. assumed, resulting in an offset of several meters (4.44 meters
Two main elements can be identified affecting the ADS-B for an aircraft cruising at 800 km/h). It should be noted
system performance; system and situational related elements. different delays are not taken into account in this research.
System related elements affect the accuracy of an ADS-B
message, while situation related elements mostly affect the Based on the truncation, accuracy and latency evaluation,
probability of proper detection and decoding of an ADS- the position accuracy of an ADS-B report is modeled as a
B message. A schematic overview is shown in Figure 1. standard normal distribution with a standard deviation of 30
Both elements are discussed and modeled in the following meters, selected as a worse case scenario.
subsections.
B. Situation Related ADS-B Elements
The situation related elements affect the detect and decode
ADS-B
probability of an ADS-B report, caused by range and
Elements
interference. Analytical models for these two aspects are
System related Situation related discussed below, based on the research performed in [4], [5].
Accuracy Timing Reception Probability Range:
State accuracy Update rate Range The derivation of an analytical model between distance and
Truncation Latency Interference detect/decode probability is based on the 1090 Extended
Squitter (ES) Minimum Operational Performance Specifica-
Figure1. SchematicoverviewofelementsdegradingADS-Bperformance. tions (MOPS) [7]. The general approach, described in [5], is
followed. This derivation consists of 5 steps.
Step 1: The derivation begins by computing the Free Space
A. System Related ADS-B Elements
Path Loss (FSPL) for the 1090 MHz frequency.
ThequalityofanADS-Bmessageisaffectedbytruncation,
4πdf2
state accuracy and latency. FSPL(d)= (2)
c
Truncation: In Equation (2) c (speed of light) and f (carrier frequency)
Thepositionreportscontainlatitudeandlongitudelocations. are constant. The FSPL per Nautical Mile (NM) is shown in
The latitude an longitude are both transmitted using 6 signif- Equation (3).
icant digits. The offset caused by truncation is the distance
dB
between two locations where the 6th digit is changed. The FSPL (r)=95.55+20·log (r)[ ] (3)
NM 10 NM
Haversinefunction,showninEquation(1),isusedtocalculate
Step 2: The second step is to obtain the relation between
the great-circle distance between two points in meters, ex-
distance and received power (S ) for a specific transmit
pressedinlatitudeandlongitude.Inthisequationφislatitude rec
power (S ), shown in Equation (4).
(rad), λ is longitude (rad), and R (m) is the earth radius. trans
S =S −FSPL −20·log (r) (4a)
∆φ ∆λ rec trans 1NM 10
a=sin( )+cos(φ )·cos(φ )·sin2( ) (1a)
2 1 2 2 S rec =S rec 1NM −20·log 10 (r) (4b)
√ √
c=atan2( a, 1−a) (1b)
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands

--- Page 3 ---

In Equation (4), (S −FSPL ) equals the received
trans 1NM
poweratadistanceof1NauticalMile(NM),calledS , 1) Omni-directional antenna used by transmitting and re-
rec 1NM
for a transmitted power of S . Rewriting this equation, ceiving aircraft.
trans
a relation between distance and received power is obtained, 2) A constant noise level on the 1090 MHz frequency is
shown in Section II-B. assumed, based on [7].
3) No multi-path effects.
r =10
−(Srec−S
20
rec1NM)
(5) 4) Weather related effects are not taken into account.
5) No shielding by aircraft of ADS-B transmitter/receiver
antenna.
Step 3: In this step the detect and decode probability of
an ADS-B report (without interference) is modeled as an
Interference
exponential function of received signal power (S ) [5]. At
rec
If multiple ADS-B messages are received simultaneously at
the maximum reception distance, r , the detect and decode
0
a receiver, it may not be possible to decode the received
probability is set to zero. The received power at r is defined
0
messages depending on the degree of overlap. This effect is
as S [7]. The variable k is used to scale the curve of the
rec0
called interference, and is visualized in Figure 2.
reception probability function, resulting in Equation (6).
To model the effect of interference on detect and decode
P(S rec
)=1−10−k(Srec−
20
Srec0)
,S rec ≥S rec0 (6)
probability, the Poisson distribution, shown in Equation (10),
has been used. This probability distribution is generally used
Step 4: The distance between transmitter and receiver for a to calculate the number of events occurring during a specified
detect and decode probability of zero, as a function of range time interval:
(instead of received power), can be obtained by substituting
Section II-B in Equation (6): e−λt
P[X =k]=(λt)k , k =0,1,2,... (10)
k!
Inthisequation,λistheexpectednumberofeventsoccurring
P(r)=1− (cid:16) r·10−(Srec1N 2 M 0 −Srec0)(cid:17)k ,r ≥r 0 (7) i o n cc u u n r i r t in ti g m i e n , i t n i t s er th va e l in o t f e l r e v n a g l t l h en t, gt a h n , d X P is is th th e e n p u r m ob b a e b r i o li f ty ev o e f n X ts
The received power S results in a zero detect and decode occurrences in an interval of length t.
0
probability with the corresponding distance r . Using Sec- The different ADS-B transmission rates, discussed in the
0
tion II-B, r is obtained as shown in Equation (8) previous section for the 6 different ADS-B reports, are con-
0
sidered. Each message has a duration of 120µ seconds and a
r 0 =10 −(Srec0− 2 S 0 rec1NM) (8) totalupdaterateof6.4Hzisobtained.TheeffectoftheTraffic
CollisionAvoidanceSystem(TCAS),transmittedonthesame
The inverse of Equation (8) is substituted in Equation (7)
frequencyisalsoadded.Thefollowingassumptionsaremade:
to obtain Equation (9).
1) No de-garbling is used. De-garbling can be modeled by
r selecting a lower message duration.
P(r)=1−( )k,r ≥r (9)
r 0 2) ADS-B message is modeled as 1 message, containing
0
all the state information (instead of several different
Equation(9)isusedtodeterminetheno-interferencereception
messages).
probability as a function range, using a fixed transmit power,
S . λ is calculated by the summation of the message update
trans
Step 5: For the final step, the value of the scaling variable frequencies (F update ), multiplied by the number of aircraft
k is determined. In [7] a minimum triggering level (S MTL ) within range (N ac ), shown in Equation (11).
of -90 dBm for Class A3 equipped commercial transport is
defined with the following requirements:
1) If link margin (S − S ) = 3dB the minimum 1.0
rec MTL
reception probability should be ≥ 0.99.
0.5
2) If link margin (S − S ) = -3dB the minimum
rec MTL
0.0
reception probability should be ≥ 0.15.
SubstitutingthesevaluesinEquation(6)resultsinascaling 0.5
−
factor k of 6.4314. In this model, it should be noted that the
1.0
−
maximum reception distance, r , is a function of transmit
0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
power (S trans ) and sensor sensitivity (S rec0 ). Time[s] × 10− 6
The following assumptions are made in the detect and
decode probability model derived with respect to range:
]-[edutilpmadezilamroN
3
ADS-Bsignal
Interferringsignal
Originalsignal
Figure2. Interferenceeffect;bitsfromtheoriginalsignalcannotbedecoded
anymoreduetointerference.
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands

--- Page 4 ---

4
independent variables for each experiment are different. But,
Receptionanddecodingprobability the scenario settings, Conflict Detection (CD) and Conflict
Resolution (CR) method, and dependent variables are similar
between the experiments.
1.0
0.8 A. Simulation Environment
0.6
BlueSky, an open-source Python based Air Traffic Con-
0.4
trol (ATC) simulator developed at the Delft University of
0.2 Technology, is used as simulation environment. Many useful
0.0 features are already available in the simulator, such as CD
0 50 100 500 250 0 andCRintheAirborneSeparationAssuranceSystem(ASAS)
150 750
Range[NM] 200 1000 Nr AC module. DataLog options, way-point routing and aircraft
performance limitations (accelerations, bank angles etc.) are
also implemented. The open-source characters enables easy
Figure 3. ADS-B detect and decode probability for MOPS specifications,
implementation of new modules, such as an ADS-B model,
basedonnumberofinterferringaircraftandrangebetweenaircraft.
in the simulator. For this research, the simulation update rate
was set to 10 Hz. Further information regarding the simulator
can be found in [10].
λ=N ·F (11)
ac update
B. Conflict Detection
Assume a message is received at t=0. The duration of an
ADS-B message τ is 120µs, equal to the time variable in In the context of CD&R it is important to distinguish
Equation (10). between intrusions and conflicts. An intrusion, also known
To obtain the probability no other messages are received in as Loss Of Separation (LOS), occurs when the following
this time interval the variable X in Equation (10) is set equal minimum separation requirements are violated [11]:
to 0, resulting in Equation (12). • 5 Nautical miles in the horizontal plane
• 1000 feet in the vertical plane
e−λt
P[X =0]=(λt)0 (12a) On the other hand, a conflict is a predicted intrusion within a
0!
certain look-ahead time; a five minute look-ahead time used
P[X =0]=e−Nac(·FADS−B·τADS−B+FTCAS·τTCAS) (12b) in this work [11]. To detect conflicts, the simple state-based
CD method is used. Here, linear extrapolation of aircraft state
vectors over the look-ahead time is used to detect conflicting
trajectories.
C. Situation Related ADS-B Model
The detect and decode probabilities described in Sec- C. Conflict Resolution - MVP
tion II-B can be combined. The corresponding detect and The Modified Voltage Potential (MVP) conflict resolution
decode probability is shown in Equation (13). The probability method is based on modeling aircraft as similarly charged
P T(i,j) resembles the combined detect and decode probability particles that repel each other as described in [12], [1]. The
of aircraft i receiving an ADS-B message from aircraft j, determinationoftheMVP-basedresolutionvectorisshownin
depending on range and interference. P R(i,j) is the detect more detail in Figure 4:
and decode probability of aircraft i with respect to aircraft
j due to range between the two aircraft. P I(i,j) (N acscaled ) O(cid:48)
is the probability due to interference. The number of aircraft O
(N ) are scaled according to the distance of aircraft j
acscaled
at aircraft i. The model is shown in Figure 3.
C
Totalprobability Range ScaledInterference A
Vrel V
r
e s
P (cid:122) (r, (cid:125) N (cid:124) (cid:123) )= (cid:122) P (cid:125)(cid:124) (r (cid:123) )·P (cid:122) (N (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123) ) (13) IP Z B
T(i,j) acscaled R(i,j) I(i,j) acscaled
III. EXPERIMENTDESIGN
Inthissectionthedesignofthreeseparatefast-timesimula-
Figure4. MVP-basedconflictresolutionforaircraftAandBinthehorizontal
tionexperimentsaredescribed.Thegoalofthefirstexperiment
plane.Therelativevelocityvector(Vrel)andtheMVP-basedresolution vector
istoassesstheoverallsafetyoftheADS-Bsystem.Theaimof (Vres)aredisplayed.
the second experiment is to study the effect of ADS-B range.
Thegoalofthethirdexperimentistodifferentiatebetweenthe The relative velocity vector with respect to a conflicting
contribution of the range effect and the interference effect in aircraft (A) is calculated (V ). This relative velocity vector
rel
the ADS-B model. Since experiment has a different goal, the results in a loss of separation without any intervention. Using
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands

--- Page 5 ---

5
thisrelativevelocityanddistancebetweenthetwoaircraft,the 135NM
ClosestPointofApproach(CPA),pointC,canbedetermined.
SubsequentlytheclosestdistanceoutoftheIntruderProtected Possible
M
Zone(IPZ),pointO,isdetermined.Thecorrespondingresolu- N WPlocation
95
tion vector CO still results in a LOS. Therefore Equation (14)
can be used to find the final displacement (V ):
res Initial
Heading Test
|CO(cid:48)| 1 Volume
= (14)
|CO| |cos(arcsin( R )−arcsin(AC)| Created
AB AB AC
Using the distance vector CO(cid:48), the resolution velocity vector
Figure 6. Initialization of AC with
is calculated using Equation (15) [6]. In this equation, t is
C Figure5. Threeflightlevels 45 ◦ headingcaption.
thetimerequiredforaircraftBtoreachpointCwhentraveling
with its pre-resolution velocity. TABLEI
INDEPENDENTVARIABLES.EXPERIMENT-I
CO(cid:48)
V MVP = t +V current (15) ACdensity Low Medium High
C ADS-B MOPS Realistic Perfect
After a successful conflict resolution, aircraft are required
to follow the heading back to their original destination, i.e.,
aircraft do not recover their original track but fly the heading specifications (MOPS), one on measurements (Realistic) and
that leads them directly to their destination. Other aircraft one without ADS-B for perfect state information (Perfect).
The ADS-B performance described in the previous section
states, such as altitude and velocity, are also restored.
is based on the MOPS specifications. However, from mea-
D. Traffic Scenarios surements it is obtained that the ADS-B system has a larger
range than the MOPS specifications [8]. Also the interference
Acommonsetoftrafficscenarioswerecreatedforallthree
effect can be reduced using de-garbling. This can be mod-
experiments. The testing region is discussed first, followed
eled by reducing the specific message length in the Poisson
by the traffic demand.
distribution. Therefore two ADS-B models are assessed, one
basedonMOPSspecificationsandoneonmeasurements.The
Testing Region: A cylindrical region is used, consisting
parameters to determine the two ADS-B models are shown in
of an initialization volume and test volume. Aircraft are only
Table II.
logged while they are within the experiment area and deleted
when leaving the experiment area. To maintain a constant air TABLEII
traffic density the experiment is divided in three phases. PARAMETERSDESCRIBINGADS-BDETECTANDDECODEPROBABILITY,
BASEDONMOPS[7]ANDMEASUREMENTS[8].
TotalExperiment
150minutes ADS-BAssumptionsType
of B P a u r ir i e c l - d r l a - o u f g t p g i i n o n f g s n im p u h m u a l b a s e t e i r on Logp L e o r g fo g r i m ng an p c h e a m se etrics keep C ai r R r e c u a r t a n i f n - t o g d u a e t i n r p s c i h r t a y a f s t c e t o o nstant R0[km] MO 1 P 7 S 6 [7] Re 3 a 7 li 0 stic
45minutes 60minutes 45minutes
R0[NM] 95 200
Strans [dBm] 51 57
Post-experimentphase Strans [W] 125 500[8]
Processdata
Trafficdemand: Ascenariogeneratorisconstructedtocre- τ ADS-Bµs 120 60
ate similar air traffic scenarios (with different random number τ TCASµs 64 32
seeds). Aircraft are created on the edge of the initialization Stateaccuracy(TableIII) MOPS Realistic
boundary at one of the 40 discrete points. Aircraft are created
on three different flight levels and will randomly climb or
The resulting range and interference detect and de code
descend to a different flight level or continue cruising at the
probability curves are shown in Figure 8 and Figure 7.
current flight level. This results in conflicting aircraft from
ThedifferentsystemrelatedinaccuraciesusedintheMOPS
all possible directions. Three traffic densities are defined with
and realistic model are shown in Table III.
their corresponding steady state number of aircraft, named
Five repetitions were performed for each independent vari-
Low (50), Medium (75) and High (100).
able combination, using a different traffic scenario for each
repetition. This resulted in 45 separate runs for Experim ent I
E. Independent Variables - Experiment I
(3 ADS-B settings x 3 traffic densities x 5 repetitions).
Thegoalofthisexperimentistoassesstheoverallsafetyof
F. Independent Variables - Experiment II
the MVP method using ADS-B based state information. An
overview of the independent variables is shown in Table I. The goal of the second experiment is to study the effect of
Three ADS-B models are used; one based on the MOPS changing the maximum reception distance. From Section II
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands

--- Page 6 ---

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 50 100 150 200
Range(NM)
)-(ytilibaborP
Non-interferenceprobabilityvsrange 1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
MOPS 0.2
Realistic
0.0
0 200 400 600 800 1000
NrofInterferringAC
Figure7. MOPSandRealistic.
Range.
)-(ytilibaborP
InterferenceprobabilityvsnrofAC
NoDe-garbling
De-garbling
Figure8. MOPSandRealistic.
Interference.
TABLEIII
SYSTEMRELATEDINACCURACIES
Systemrelatedinaccuracies
Cases
Parameters Distribution Realistic MOPS
Position[m] Normal µ=0,σ=30 µ=0,σ=50
Velocity m Normal - µ=0,σ=10
s
Heading[ ◦ ] Normal - µ=0,σ=3
it can be obtained that an increase in range results in a
strongerinterferenceeffect.ThereforedifferentADS-Branges
areassessedandcompared.Thesametrafficdensitiesareused.
TherangeoftheseADS-Bmodels,basedontheMOPSmodel,
are shown in Table IV. The maximum reception range can be
modified by adapting the transmit power.
TABLEIV
INDEPENDENTVARIABLESEXPERIMENTII(RANGEANALYSIS).
MOPSfraction 1 1 1 1 2
8 4 2
ADS-BRange[NM] 12 24 48 96 192
ACdensity Low Medium High - -
The corresponding reception probability curves (defined as
fractions of the MOPS range) are shown in Figure 9.
Once again, five repetitions were performed. This resulted
in 75 separate runs for Experiment II (5 range settings x 3
traffic densities x 5 repetitions).
G. Independent Variables - Experiment III
An experiment is performed to asses the individual con-
tribution of the two situation related properties; range and
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 50 100 150 200
Range(NM)
)-(ytilibaborP
6
interference. Three traffic densities are assessed. An overview
of the independent variables is shown in Table V.
TABLEV
INDEPENDENTVARIABLES.EXPERIMENT-III
ACdensity Low Medium High
ADS-B MOPS MOPSinterference MOPSrange
The following ADS-B settings are used as independent
variables:
1) ADS-B MOPS settings, interference and range effect.
2) MOPS based range effect only.
3) MOPS based interference effect only.
For this experiment, five repetitions were also performed.
This resulted in 45 separate runs for Experiment III (3 ADS-
B models x 3 traffic densities x 5 repetitions).
H. Dependent variables
The conflicts detected, based on ADS-B state information
are being logged. Additionally the conflicts detected when
perfect state information would be available are logged. From
these two metrics the false alerts (false positives) and missed
conflicts (false negatives) can be obtained. Besides conflicts
detected, the intrusions are logged.
Data representation: Each observed dependent variable is
shown in a figure. The different traffic densities are shown
on the x-axis, and the dependent variable on the y-axis.
The legend indicates the ADS-B model. The 95% confidence
interval is shown with the error bar for the 5 repetitions of
each experiment setting.
IV. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
In this section the results of the three different experiments
are presented and discussed.
A. Results Experiment - I
The goal of this experiment is to identify the overall effect
on safety when ADS-B is used for inter-aircraft information
sharing.Anoverviewofthetypeofdetectedconflictsisshown
in Table VI.
TABLEVI
TYPEOFCONFLICTSDETECTEDASPERCENTAGEOFTOTALCONFLICTS
FORTHEMOPSANDPERFECTADS-BSETTINGS.
ADS-Bmodel Conflicttype Trafficdensity Cumulative
Low Medium High
1MOPS RealConflict 92 88 89 89
8
1MOPS MOPS FalsePositive 8 12 11 11 4 FalseNegative 5 4 5 5
1
2
MOPS
RealConflict 95 94 94 94
MOPS Realistic FalsePositive 5 6 6 6
2 · MOPS FalseNegative 3 3 4 4
It can be observed that the percentage of false positive
conflictsincreaseswithtrafficdensity.Thepercentageoffalse
Figure9. MOPSbasedreceptionmodelsdefinedasfractionofMOPSrange. alerts is larger for the MOPS based ADS-B model than the
Non-interferenceprobabilityvsrange. Realistic ADS-B model. The detected number of conflicts per
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands

--- Page 7 ---

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Low Medium High
]-[CArepdetcetedstciflnoC
MOPS Realistic Perfect
Figure10. Numberofdetectedconflictsperaircraft.Experiment-I.
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
Low Medium High
]-[CArepsnoisurtnI
MOPS Realistic Perfect
Figure11. Numberofintrusionsperaircraft.Experiment-I.
aircraftareshowninFigure10.Itisshownthatmoreconflicts
are detected for the ADS-B based state information cases.
The number of intrusions[6] per aircraft is shown in Fig-
ure 11. The number of intrusions when perfect state informa-
tion is used is larger than the case where the ADS-B model
is used for the medium and high traffic density situation.
However, no significant differences are observed.
B. Results Experiment - II
In addition to the simulations, described in Section IV-A,
a range analysis is performed. The goal of this analysis is to
assess the effect of an increase in range, which also results
in an increasing interference effect. The legend indicates the
ADS-B model as fraction of the MOPS range. The number of
detected conflicts [6] for each model are shown in Figure 12.
The models with
1th
and
1th
of the MOPS range show a
8 4
smaller amount of detected conflicts.
Figure13showsthenumberofintrusions.Largedifferences
start to occur between 1th and 1th of the range of the MOPS
8 4
performance (12 NM and 24 NM). At 25% of the MOPS
range, the number of intrusions show about a 50% increase,
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Low Medium High
carepdetcetedstciflnoC
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Low Medium High
1 1 1 8 4 2 1 2
Figure12. Numberofdetectedconflictsperaircraft.Experiment-II.
]-[CArepsnoisurtnI
1 1 1 8 4 2 1 2
Figure13. Numberofintrusionsperaircraft.Experiment-II.
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.84
0.82
0.80
Low Medium High
]-[ecnerefretnIPR
7
1 1 1 8 4 2 1 2
Figure14. Meaninterferencereceptionprobability.Experiment-II.
while at 12.5% of the MOPS range the number of intrusions
increases with 250% for the highest traffic density.
From the number of intrusions it is found that the per-
formance difference for the single MOPS model, with a
range of 96 NM (”1”) is slightly better than the model with
double the MOPS model, with a range of 190 NM (”2”)
regardingnumberofintrusions.Withthe5minuteslook-ahead
time, for both ADS-B models, the range dependent detect
and decode probabilities are in the linear region, close to 1.
However, the effect of interference increases. This is clearly
shown in Figure 14; where the decreased detect and decode
probability caused by interference is shown. The increased
range results in a decrease of detect and decode probability
due to additional interference. Therefore it can be concluded
that the interference effect should be taken into account in
extremely high traffic density situations.
C. Results Experiment - III
The goal of this final experiment is to differentiate betw een
the two main situation related effects; interference and range.
Thenumberofdetectedconflictsare showninFigure15.Itis
obtained that the number of detected conflicts for the range-
only model is slightly lower than for the other two.
The number of intrusions while using the interference-only
model is higher than the range-only model, especially a t the
higher traffic densities. The interference effect has a m ore
negative impact than the range effect, especially at the High
traffic density.
D. Discussion
From the first experiment it can be concluded that the
effect of ADS-B based state information is small for the
MVP method for the assessed traffic densities, compared
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands

--- Page 8 ---

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Low Medium High
]-[CArepdetcetedstciflnoC
MOPS Interference Range
Figure15. Numberofdetectedconflictsperaircraft.Experiment-III.
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
Low Medium High
]-[CArepsnoisurtnI
8
• The range analysis showed that the combination of state-
basedconflictdetectionandMVPisaveryrobustCD&R
method, even when the maximum range was artificially
reduced to
1th
of the ADS-B minimum ADS-B specifi-
4
cations.
• An increase in maximum reception range (by increasing
transmission power) decreases the total detect and de-
code probability. This is because increasing range also
increases signal interference as additional aircraft are
detected.
• The interference effect becomes more dominant than the
range effect for higher traffic densities.
MOPS Interference Range
• The ADS-B system should not be considered as a di-
rect limiting factor for self-separation or Free Flight.
However, the interference effect at high traffic densities
should be taken into account. The use of a single carrier
frequency, increase in transmit power and high traffic
density increase the interference effect.
• Future research will investigate the effect of ADS-B
characteristics on additional CD&R methods and for
higher densities.
Figure16. Numberofintrusionsperaircraft.Experiment-III.
REFERENCES
to using perfect state information. This is partly due to [1] M. S. Eby, “A Self-Organizational Approach for resolving Air Traffic
the look-ahead time of 5 minutes, resulting in a detect and Conflicts,”TheLincolnLaboratoryJournal,vol.7,no.2,pp.239–253,
1994.
decode probability close to one. Also the position accuracy
[2] K. Bilimoria, K. Sheth, H. Lee, and S. Grabbe, “Performance evalua-
is high with respect to the dimensions of the IPZ. However, tion of airborne separation assurance for free flight,” in 18th Applied
the interference effect should be taken into account. A larger AerodynamicsConference. AIAA,2000.
[3] M. Eby and I. Kelly, W.E., “Free flight separation assurance using
transmit power increases the number of aircraft within range
distributedalgorithms,”1999IEEEAerospaceConference.Proceedings
causing interference. Additionally, the impact of each aircraft (Cat.No.99TH8403),vol.2,1999.
increases, due to the higher transmitted power level. Also [4] R.Barhydt,M.T.Palmer,andN.Langley,“Ads-bwithinamulti-aircraft
simulationfordistributedair-groundtrafficmanagement,”AIAADigital
in the sensitivity analysis (Experiment - III) the effect of
AvionicsSystemsConference,2004.
interference became larger at higher traffic densities. The [5] W.ChungandR.Staab,“A1090ExtendedSquitterAutomaticDepen-
detect and decode probability decreases with increasing dentSurveillance-Broadcast(ADS-B)ReceptionModelforAir-Traffic-
ManagementSimulations,”AIAA2006-6614,ModelingandSimulation
number of aircraft according to the Poisson distribution.
TechnologiesConferenceandExhibit,no.August,pp.1–11,2006.
Additionally an increase in maximum reception range (i.e. [6] J.Maas,E.Sunil,J.Ellerbroek,andJ.Hoekstra,“Theeffectofswarming
transmit power) decreases the interference probability even onavoltagepotential-basedconflictresolutionalgorithm,”ICRAT,2016.
[7] RTCA Special Committee 186, “Minimum Aviation System Perfor-
further. Since significant ATM research efforts are devoted
mance Standards for Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast
towards increasing airspace capacity, it is necessary to (ADS-B),”RTCA/Do-242a,2002.
consider the impact of ADS-B signal interference when these [8] B. S. Y. D. Ali, W. Schuster, W. Ochieng, A. Majumdar, and T. K.
Chiew,“FrameworkforADS-BPerformanceAssessment:theLondon
higher densities are realized.
TMACaseStudy,”AIAA,pp.39–52,2013.
[9] Global positioning system standard positioning service performance
standard (2008). [Online]. Available: http://www.gps.gov/technic al/ps/
2008-SPS-performance-standard.pdf
[10] J.M.HoekstraandJ.Ellerbroek,“BlueSkyATCSimulatorProject:an
V. CONCLUSION
OpenDataandOpenSourceApproach,”ICRAT2016.
[11] E.Sunil,J.Ellerbroek,andJ.Hoekstra,“Analysisofairspacestructure
In this paper, an ADS-B model based on system and
and capacity for decentralized separation using fast-time simulations,”
situation related characteristics was presented. The effect JournalofGuidanceControlandDynamics,2016.
of these characteristics on airborne Conflict Detection and [12] J. Hoekstra, R. van Gent, and R. Ruigrok, “Designing for safet y: the
free flight air traffic management concept,” Reliability Engineering &
Resolution (CD&R) was studied using fast-time simulation
SystemSafety75,pp.215–232,2002.
experiments. Here, state-based conflict detection and
the Modified Voltage Potential (MVP) conflict resolution
algorithmwasusedasacase-study.Forthestudiedconditions,
the following conclusions can be drawn:
• The difference in safety between using ADS-B based
stateinformationandperfectstateinformationwassmall.
8-10 November 2016
Hosted by Technical University of Delft, the Netherlands