

--- Page 1 ---

Delft University of Technology
Geovectoring: Reducing Traffic Complexity to Increase the Capacity of UAV airspace
Hoekstra, Jacco; Ellerbroek, Joost; Sunil, Emmanuel; Maas, Jerom
Publication date
2018
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript
Published in
2018 International Conference on Research in Air Transportation
Citation (APA)
Hoekstra, J., Ellerbroek, J., Sunil, E., & Maas, J. (2018). Geovectoring: Reducing Traffic Complexity to
Increase the Capacity of UAV airspace. In 2018 International Conference on Research in Air Transportation:
Barcelona, Spain, 2018
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10.

--- Page 2 ---

ICRAT 2018
Geovectoring: Reducing Traffic Complexity to Increase
the Capacity of UAV airspace
Jacco M. Hoekstra, Joost Ellerbroek, Emmanuel Sunil, Jerom Maas
Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft,
Delft, Netherlands
Abstract—Both U-space in Europe, as well as UTM in the USA, SESAR’s U-space program in Europe as well as FAA’s
develop concepts and tools for UAV airspace. Enabling high- UTM program in the USA are in the process of developing
density operations is one of the goals of these studies. Past and concepts for updating regulations and airspace organisation for
recent studies have analysed which factors affect the capacity of these applications in a safe and efficient way [2]. For U-space
a UAV airspace. An improved understanding of this can lead to the deployment of services is divided into four steps[3]
control methods for capacity management. Two general
principles for capacity management can be distinguished: • U1: U-space foundation services: e-registration, e-
controlling the traffic density, and controlling the traffic identification and geofencing
complexity. The first approach can be achieved using geofencing
• U2: U-space initial services: flight planning, approval,
or geocaging, which is foreseen for UAV airspace. The second
tracking, information & procedures
approach is hardly addressed in the planned concepts. In this
paper a new, general concept, called geovectoring, is proposed
• U3: U-space advanced services: complex ops in dense
which could increase the capacity by reducing the traffic
areas, capacity management, conflict detection &
complexity for U-Space and UTM. This paper therefore proposes
resolution
to add geovectoring as a third service to the already planned
concepts of geofencing and geocaging. • U4: U-space full services: fully interfaced with
manned aviation, highly automated
Keywords: UAVs; drones; RPAS; U-space; UTM; airspace;
capacity; geofencing; geocaging; geovectoring Enabling high-density operations with multiple automated
drones under the supervision of drone operators is one of the
I. INTRODUCTION key principles of U-space. Currently foreseen enablers for this
are a combination of (dynamic) geofencing, to confine UAVs
The technology of UAS or drones, here referred to as
to allowed airspace, and capacity management strategies from
UAVs, is advancing fast. This technological development
manned aviation might be adapted for this airspace. However,
opens up many new potential applications. Examples are
recent studies [4] have indicated that, with their focus on
inspection tasks for energy and agriculture, surveillance for
(static) traffic density, such strategies will not be sufficient to
public safety and security as well as package deliveries for
cater the envisioned unmanned traffic densities, nor the
emergency or premium services. By not requiring a pilot and
heterogeneity of flights/missions. This can only be achieved if
due to the smaller size, for the same application, autonomous
management of traffic complexity is taken into account. This
drones are generally cheaper, faster, cleaner and more energy
paper proposes a potential solution to improve the efficiency,
efficient than their manned flying and non-flying counterparts.
safety and capacity of very low-level airspace, which may
As a result UAVs or drones have the potential to deliver a
provide a key component for capacity management in U3.
significant contribution to society in terms of economy,
sustainability and safety. Using the results from a study which simulated extreme
traffic densities [4], an analysis will be made of what affects
A drone outlook study by SESAR [1] expects, next to the
the capacity of airspace in general. From this, two options to
seven million leisure drones, a fleet of 400,000 drones for
control the airspace capacity are presented. One is well known
commercial and government missions by 2050. The fastest
and in line with current developments. The second option is
growth is expected for the period from 2025 to 2035. While the
new and will be discussed more extensively using some
largest economic impact is expected for agriculture, urban
examples. After a description of how this could be
applications such as delivery and surveillance pose the largest
implemented, the paper ends with conclusions and
challenge for airspace organisation due to the high
recommendations.
concentration of vehicles flying at very low levels, over
densely populated areas.

--- Page 3 ---

ICRAT 2018
II. CAPACITY OF AN AIRSPACE STRUCTURE This concept uses two methods to reduce the conflict rate:
segmentation and relative speed reduction. Segmentation
The capacity of an airspace is limited by safety and
reduces the number of possible combinations of potentially
efficiency. When drones have a higher collision probability
conflicting aircraft. The faster an aircraft flies, the more
this affects the third-party risk as well as the economic
airspace is crossed. Hence, on average more aircraft will be
viability. When too many conflict resolution manoeuvres are
encountered. However, the relative speed is the speed at which
required to avoid intrusions of the protected zones of UAVs,
an aircraft is encountered and it therefore scales directly with
this can lead to an inefficient flight or even lead to airspace
the conflict rate. These principles can be generalized for any
instability due to domino effects. In both cases, the capacity is
control method used in UAV airspace capacity management.
limited by the conflict rate, so how often an intrusion is
To define these control methods, the next section analyses the
predicted per time unit. Therefore, the conflict rate, which is
general principles before defining the control methods in
equivalent to the conflict probability, is a useful metric for both
section IV.
efficiency and safety and can hence be used as an indicator for
capacity: The capacity of an airspace can be expressed in terms
of a maximum conflict rate. III. CONFLICT RATE, TRAFFIC DENSITY AND SPEED
It has been acknowledged that airspace structure and the Conflicts are defined as predicted, not actual, losses of
resulting conflict rate, or demand for service, plays a role in separation. When detected in time, they are solved by what is
airspace capacity [5]. In a centrally controlled airspace this called conflict resolution, an avoidance manoeuvre. Conflict
maximum demand for service is determined by the workload detection and resolution (CD&R) have been studied for many
of a controller. In future concepts, higher levels of automation years in the context of free flight and airborne separation
and higher traffic densities will require a different approach to assurance systems. Nowadays for UAVs specifically, CD&R is
separation assurance. Nevertheless, the conflict rate is still an often referred to as ‘detect and avoid’ (DAA), but the same
important limiting factor, albeit in a different way. principles apply.
How an urban airspace should be organized to maximize Intrusions are prevented in different phases, depending on
capacity was investigated experimentally with massive traffic the time to the predicted intrusion:
simulations in the Metropolis project [4]. The key question was
1. Intrinsic prevention: Airspace design or dynamic
whether more or less structure would benefit the capacity of
airspace (re)configuration to prevent conflicts
the airspace. Four concepts with an increasing level of
structure (see Figure 1) were tested under extreme traffic 2. Strategic resolution: Planning of trajectories
densities using batch simulations while measuring conflict rate,
3. Tactical resolution: Detect and resolve conflicts
domino effects, intrusions and inefficiencies.
When intrusions cannot be prevented, an additional, last
minute collision avoidance safety net can be added, analogue
to TCAS for manned flight.
As the first phase of the prevention of intrusions, airspace
design generally aims at preventing conflicts by lowering the
average conflict rate. Properties of both the traffic pattern and
the airspace structure drive this conflict rate, and influence the
capacity.
Two types of conflict rate should be distinguished:
• global conflict rate: the total number of conflicts in
Figure 1 Metropolis airspace concepts
an airspace for all vehicles together per unit of time
simulated with 9.5 million flights in total
• local conflict rate: the number of conflicts as
The Metropolis results showed that the so-called “Layers- experienced by one vehicle per unit of time
concept” was the most successful in preventing a high global
When there is no domino effect, which is to be prevented
conflict rate with a minimum impact on the flight efficiency. In
by limiting the conflict rate, the probability of a conflict of any
the Layers-concept the heading range, or heading span,
pair of aircraft is generally independent of the number of
determines in which layer a level flight is conducted to reach
vehicles in the airspace. If we name this probability p and we
speed alignment within specified margins. Both when flying 2
call the number of aircraft in an airspace N, then the local
level in compliance with this rule or when changing altitude,
conflict rate CR , i.e. per flight, is given by the product of
the conflict detection and resolution was still active, using local
this probability with the number of other aircraft (list of
lateral manoeuvres to avoid having to leave the Layer when
symbols can also be found at the end of this paper):
resolving conflicts.

--- Page 4 ---

ICRAT 2018
CR =(N −1)p (1)
local 2
The global conflict rate CR is the product of the
global
number of possible combinations of two aircraft with the
conflict probability of one pair of aircraft , which multiplies
equation (1) with the number of vehicles N as well as with ½ to
avoid counting every pair twice (so conflict A-B and B-A are
counted as one conflict) [6][7] :
(cid:167)N(cid:183) 1
CR = (cid:168) (cid:184) p = N(N −1)p (2)
global (cid:169) 2 (cid:185) 2 2 2
The mathematical truth is that the global conflict rate Figure 2 Converging aircraft with similar speed
increases squared with the number of aircraft as opposed to the
linear increase for the local conflict rate. The local conflict rate
is per vehicle, so this is what is experienced on the airborne From Figure 2, it can be seen that the relative speed is a
side. function of the heading difference:
It can be seen that lowering p , the probability for any pair (cid:167)1 (cid:183)
2
of aircraft to have a conflict, will have positive effect on the V =2Vsin (cid:168) ∆hdg (cid:184) (4a)
rel (cid:169)2 (cid:185)
capacity under both centralized (e.g. strategic) and
decentralized (e.g. tactical) control. By looking at which
Two simplifications are used here: the conflict-as-a-point,
factors influence the conflict rate, Jardin [8] has expanded this
while with a minimum distance larger than zero, the geometry
into an expression which includes the average ground speed V,
changes and the aforementioned equal speeds assumption. The
the horizontal separation distance R, the airspace area A and
effect of the conflict geometry can be ignored as long as the
observation interval T :
separation minima are small compared to the distances flown
during the observation period and/or lookahead time
VR N VR
N = k ⇔ CR = conf = k (3) (prediction horizon). When the two speeds are not equal,
conf AT global T A equation 4a becomes slightly more complex:
The average ground speed can be seen as the clock or pace V = V2 +V2 −2VV cos(∆hdg) (4b)
of the conflict situation: when all aircraft fly twice as fast, the rel 1 2 1 2
conflict rate will be doubled.
For equal speeds this reduces to equation 4a, by using the
However, it can be shown that the factor that drives the following standard substitution:
conflict rate is not the absolute speed, but the relative speed or
closure speed [9]. This relative speed is proportional to the cos(∆hdg)=1−2sin2 (cid:167) (cid:168) 1 ∆hdg (cid:183) (cid:184) (4c)
ground speed, but can be lowered independently by not just (cid:169)2 (cid:185)
limiting the magnitude but also the direction of the ground
Using a uniform heading distribution over a heading range
speed vector. This principle explains the result of the layers
α, a probability distribution of the heading difference can be
concept coming out best in the study mentioned before: it
used for the simplified equation 4a, resulting in an integral
reduces the relative speed without concentrating traffic or
which can be solved analytically. Comparable with throwing
reducing the route efficiency.
two dice, where 7 is a more likely outcome than 2 or 12, for a
An analysis of the effect of the heading range can be made uniform heading range, the distribution of the heading
with some assumptions. When assuming both aircraft have a difference is a triangle as shown in Figure 3 [10].
similar speed V, the relative speed can be expressed as
function of

--- Page 5 ---

ICRAT 2018
shows the effect on the capacity when this reduced conflict rate
is used for a increase in capacity, using the inverse of equation
2 for large values of N.
The capacity analysis method has been further developed
and validated experimentally [11]. A large Monte-Carlo study
using the Open ATM simulator BlueSky was ran for different
concepts and different types of aircraft. It tested the influence
of the assumptions and simplifications like equal speed and the
conflict-as-a-point geometry. The results showed a good match
between what is predicted by the mathematical model and the
experimental results. An example is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 3 Distribution of heading difference when allowed
heading is limited by α degrees
Averaging the combination of equation (4a) with Figure 3
results in the predicted global conflict rate [10] :
(cid:167)1 (cid:183)2R⋅t
CR = N(N −1) lookahead ⋅E(V )
(cid:168) (cid:184)
global (cid:169)2 (cid:185) A rel
(5)
with E(V )=
(cid:167)
(cid:168)
8V (cid:167)
(cid:168) 1−
2
sin
(cid:167)
(cid:168)
1
a
(cid:183)
(cid:184)
(cid:183)
(cid:184)
(cid:183)
(cid:184)
rel (cid:169) a(cid:169) a (cid:169)2 (cid:185)(cid:185)(cid:185) Figure 4 Experimental validations of mathematical
conflict count model for different α’s (line is analytical
The factor which is expanded on the second line shows the
prediction, points in clouds are experimental results)
effect of limiting the heading range to a span of α degrees. A
further detailed explanation as well as the inclusion of the
vertical dimension can be found in Sunil et al [9].
IV. FROM ANALYSIS TO CONTROL
TABLE I. CONFLICT RATE CHANGE AND CAPACITY CHANGE A. Segmentation
AS A FUNCTION OF HEADING INTERVAL SIZE
Airspace structures are often used to separate different
Heading range α Conflict rate change Capacity change traffic flows, and in this way clustering similar traffic. This can
360° 0 % 0% be beneficial but it can also artificially concentrate traffic,
creating high densities, which has an adverse effect on safety.
180° -27 % +17%
A positive effect of dividing an airspace into different sectors,
90° -60 % +58% is that the global conflict rate will be reduced due to the so-
called segmentation effect. For instance, in the Layers concept
45° -80 % +121%
mentioned in section II, the effect of creating L layers, with
30° -86 % +171% uniformly distributed the traffic over the L layers, can be
illustrated by rewriting equation 2. The global conflict rate then
15° -93 % +282%
becomes L times the conflict rate per layer, where the number
10° -95 % +368% of aircraft has been reduced by the same factor L:
1 N (cid:167) N (cid:183) N (cid:167) N (cid:183)
For this paper the relevance is the principle applied here: CR global = L⋅ 2 L (cid:168) (cid:169) L −1 (cid:184) (cid:185) p 2 = 2 (cid:168) (cid:169) L −1 (cid:184) (cid:185) p 2 (6)
the effect of limiting the heading range on the conflict rate, as
shown in the table above, which is results from equation 5. The
1
table clearly shows the large effect of some alignment of the N (cid:21) L ⇒ CR (L)≈ CR (L=1) (7)
speeds to reduce the relative speed and hence the conflict rate, global L global
without changing the absolute value of the speed, which is
assumed to be equal or similar in this table. The last column

--- Page 6 ---

ICRAT 2018
The segmentation effect, due to the squared nature of V. GEOVECTORING DEFINITION
equation 2, effectively divides the conflict rate by the number
A geovector consists of two parts: the definition of an area
of groups L for high traffic densities.
and the definition of the allowed intervals of the speed
Geofencing and geocaging restrict the position of UAVs. components. The area for which the geovector is applicable
While geofencing is used mainly to define no-go areas for can be defined as a series of (lat, lon) positions with a lower
UAVs, geocaging can be used to keep a group of UAVs in a and upper altitude (prism). The area definition format can be
part of the airspace. Geocaging can exploit the segmentation the same as used for geofencing and geocaging. The only
effect to control and reduce the global conflict rate and thus difference is the type and the extra information: the geovector
increase the overall capacity. intervals.
For practical purposes, the geovector components are polar
B. Relative speed reduction
for the horizontal speed vector, complemented by a vertical
Table I in section II shows an example of how a heading speed for the vertical dimension:
range reduction can lowering the conflict rate by limiting the
relative speed. It show that lowering of the conflict rate has the (cid:167)GSinterval(cid:183)
potential to realize a large increase in airspace capacity. There V = (cid:168) cinterval (cid:184) =
geo (cid:168) (cid:184)
are other ways than layering the airspace to limit the relative (cid:168) (cid:184) (8)
(cid:169)VSinterval (cid:185)
speed: in general, putting limitations on any of the 3D speed
vector’s components of UAVs in a part of the airspace can be (cid:167)[Groundspeed ,Groundspeed ](cid:183)
min max
used to dynamically optimize convergence speeds and hence (cid:168) [Course ,Course ] (cid:184) = f(lat,lon,altitude)
(cid:168) min max (cid:184)
conflict probabilities in an airspace. These limits can add extra (cid:168)[VerticalSpeed ,VerticalSpeed ](cid:184)
safety and capacity on top of the segmentation effect. (cid:169) min max (cid:185)
As a symbolic notation, for example on a map or when
As currently geofencing and geocaging only limit the 3D
describing an airspace design, it could be presented graphically
position, this paper proposes to add a limitation the 3D speed
for example with a format like in Figure 6.
vector components as a function of the geographical position.
This principle is called geovectoring, to indicate it is a third
component which logically fits in the sequence as indicated in
Figure 5.
Figure 6 Symbolic representation of a geovector e.g. on a
map (green zones indicate allowed ranges)
Many current airspace designs or rules can be expressed
with this definition. Together with the expected demand
distributions, this definition provides a baseline input needed to
Figure 5 U-space elements for capacity management
compare conflict rates mathematically with the analysis
methods mentioned above, allowing the selection of an
Geovectoring differs from the normal ‘vectoring’ as airspace design in a way that optimises safety and capacity.
currently used in ATC. The normal vectoring, assumes a form
When studying the capacity of an airspace there are
of direct control of the speed vector by ATC of an individual
basically two important aspects: the traffic density (or static
vehicle. In the geovectoring concept vectoring becomes a
density) and the traffic complexity (dynamic density) [13][14].
function of the airspace, i.e. the position, (‘geo’) and only an
Using this distinction, it can be stated that geocaging &
interval is specified for one or more components of the 3D
geofencing regulate the (static) traffic density, while
speed vector, and vehicles are free to choose a velocity vector
geovectoring controls the traffic complexity, schematically it is
within that interval. This interval vector then applies to all
shown in Figure 7.
vehicles in that sector.

--- Page 7 ---

ICRAT 2018
In general, the geovector would be specified independent
per area, not with formulae but with actual numbers. First a
definition of the area and then three intervals. A layers concept
would thus be a series with a geovector for each layer,
allowing different and less regular divisions based on demand.
Geovectors can be used to define anything ranging from tubes,
departing/arriving zones to layers. It is a generic format, which
can therefore be implemented to be used in an automated way
by UAVs control software in a similar fashion as geofencing.
Geovectors are applicable as long as the mission allows
setting limits on the speed vector. A loitering surveillance or
observations mission, will not allow limits on for the heading
component of the geovector for instance. Similarly, there might
be missions for which the required speed vector is even
Figure 7 Geovectoring is a way to control the traffic unpredictable, where only setting a vertical speed limit will be
possible. Delivery drones are typically flying missions for
complexity
which the heading component of geovector will be very useful
VI. EXAMPLES OF GEOVECTORS AS AIRSPACE DESIGN to reduce the relative speeds.
SPECIFICATION
The semi-circular or hemispherical rule as used for IFR VII. IMPLEMENTING GEOVECTORING FOR U-SPACE AND
traffic below FL290 or under Reduced Vertical Separation UTM
Minima (RVSM), specifies a flight level as function of Using a list of geovectoring definitions for different areas,
magnetic track angle: Eastbound traffic (magnetic track 000 to complex airspace designs with corridors, flow patterns, zones
179°) should use the odd thousands (FL 250, 270, etc.) while and layers can be defined to facilitate local circumstances or
westbound traffic (magnetic track 180 to 359°) should use the specific missions.
even thousands (FL 260, 280, etc.). Many other already
existing airspace regulations can also be defined using the Two types of geovectors can be distinguished (Figure 8):
geovector format, such as speed restrictions as function of
• Static geovectors - defined as part of a navigation
altitude h , Some examples are given below
database, fixed over a longer time
Semi-circular rule:
• Dynamic geovectors - may vary over time, need to be
(cid:167) [0,→) (cid:183) broadcasted
(cid:168) (cid:184) (9)
V geo (h[FL])= (cid:168) (cid:168)(cid:171) (cid:170) (cid:172) 180°⋅mod(cid:168) (cid:167) (cid:169) h 1 − 0 10 ,2(cid:184) (cid:183) (cid:185) ,359°−180°mod(cid:168) (cid:167) (cid:169)1 h 0 ,2(cid:184) (cid:183) (cid:185) (cid:187) (cid:186) (cid:188) (cid:184) (cid:184) D tim yn e a , m th i i c s h g a e s o v im ec p t l o i r c i a n t g io n is s f a o r g t e h o e v i e m ct p o l r e m w e h n i t c a h ti o c n h , a n n o g t e s fo r o v th e e r
(cid:168) (cid:184)
(cid:168) (cid:169) [0,0] (cid:184) (cid:185) algebraic definition. The data format simply then also needs a
time interval
Maximum speed of 250 kts below FL100 (but then as a
ground speed limit!):
(cid:167)[0,250kts](cid:183) (cid:167)
(cid:168)
[Groundspeed
min
,Groundspeed
max
](cid:183)
(cid:184) (12)
(cid:168) (cid:184) V = [Course ,Course ] = f(lat,lon,altitude,time)
V (h<FL100)= [0°,360°] (10) geo (cid:168) min max (cid:184)
geo (cid:168) (cid:184) (cid:168)[VerticalSpeed ,VerticalSpeed ](cid:184)
(cid:168) (cid:184) (cid:169) min max (cid:185)
[0,0]
(cid:169) (cid:185)
A evenly distributed layers concept with L layers with is a
variation on the semi-circular rule.
For layer i:
(cid:167) [0,→) (cid:183)
(cid:168) (cid:184)
V geo (i)= (cid:168) (cid:168) (cid:170) (cid:171) (cid:172) mod (cid:167) (cid:168) (cid:169) 36 L 0° i,360° (cid:183) (cid:184) (cid:185) ,mod (cid:167) (cid:168) (cid:169) 36 L 0° (i+1),360° (cid:183) (cid:184) (cid:185) (cid:187) (cid:188) (cid:186)(cid:184) (cid:184) (11)
(cid:168) (cid:184)
(cid:168) [0,0] (cid:184)
(cid:169) (cid:185)

--- Page 8 ---

ICRAT 2018
Geovectoring can be used to reduce the airspace
complexity. It allows controlling the relative speed by
specifying intervals as restrictions on the absolute 3D ground
speed vector components. The geovectoring service can greatly
increase the airspace capacity and improve the safety and
efficiency of UAV airspace. Therefore it is important to further
investigate how geovectoring protocol can be utilized in UAV
airspace concepts.
IX. REFERENCES
[1] SESAR JU, “European Drones Outlook Study – Unlocking the value for
Europe”, SESAR, November 2016
Figure 8 Geovectors can be static (navigation database)
[2] P. Kopardekar, S. Bradford, “UAS Traffic Management (UTM)
or dynamic (real-time broadcast/network service) Research Transition team (RTT) p”, NASA/FAA, January 2017
[3] SESAR JU, “U-Space Blueprint”, SESAR, 2017
[4] E. Sunil, J.M. Hoekstra et al., “Metropolis: Relating Airspace Structure
Dynamic geovectors require a data link protocol, which
and Capacity for Extreme Traffic Densities”, Eleventh USA/Europe Air
allows changing both the area specification, as well as the Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2015),
vector intervals over time. This could be used for Barcelona, 2015
reconfiguration: to adapt the airspace layout to daily or [5] M. Janic and V. Tosic, "En route sector capacity model," Transportation
seasonal patterns, to varying densities or specific gained Science, vol. 25, no. 4, 1991
insights on how to optimize the airspace utilization. [6] J.M. Hoekstra, R.C.J. Ruigrok, R.N.H.W. van Gent, “ Free Flight in
Crowded Airspace”, FAA/Eurocontrol 3rd USA/Europe Air Traffic
Implementing a datalink protocol or a message format Management R&D Seminar,Naples, June 2000
requires a lead time of several years, so the introduction of a [7] J. M. Hoekstra, R. N. H. W. van Gent, and R. C. J. Ruigrok, “Designing
dynamic geovectoring concept in e.g. the U-Space concept for safety: the free flight air traffic management concept,” Reliability
phase U3 needs to be prepared well in advance. Similarly, the Engineering & System Safety, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 215–232, Feb. 2002
implementation on the airborne side where this might need to [8] M. R. Jardin, “Analytical Relationships Between Conflict Counts and
Air-Traffic Density,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol.
be automated takes time. This increases the urgency of
28, no. 6, pp. 1150–1156, 2005. [Online]. Available:
adopting geovectoring as a standard concept for UAV airspace.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2514/1.12758
[9] E. Sunil, Ellerbroek, J.M. Hoekstra, J. Maas, “Three-Dimensional
VIII. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS Conflict Count Models fot Unstructured and Layered Airspace
Designs,” submitted to Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Both experimental as well as analytical work on airborne Technologies, Dec 2017
separation assurance and on urban airspaces with extreme [10] J.M.Hoekstra, J. Maas, M. Tra, E. Sunil, “How Do Layered Airspace
densities, have contributed to our understanding of the relation Design Parameters Affect Airspace Capacity and Safety?”, International
between heading, speed, vertical speed, the relative speed, the Conference for Research of Air Transport (ICRAT 2016), Philadelphia,
2016
conflict rate, the conflict probability and the airspace capacity.
[11] E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek, J.M. Hoekstra – “CAMDA: Capacity
It is now the time to research how this knowledge from the Assessment Method for Decentralized Air Traffic Control”, submitted to
analysis can be used to control the airspace capacity where International Conference for Research of Air Transport (ICRAT 2018),
Barcelona, 2018
extreme densities are expected in the near future: the UAV
[12] J.M. Hoekstra, Ellerbroek, J. – “BlueSky ATC Simulator Project: an
airspace.
Open Data and Open Source Approach”, International Conference for
Currently, studies on UAV airspace design and regulations Research of Air Transport (ICRAT 2016), Philadelphia, 2016
in both U-Space and UTM have been focused on capacity [13] Laudeman, L.G.,Shelden, S.G., Branstrom, R., Brasil, C.L., “Dynamic
Density: An Air Traffic Management Metric”, NASA/TM-1998-112226
management by position, hence by traffic (static) density only,
– April 1998
using concepts such as geofencing and geocaging.
[14] Puechmorel, S., Delahaye, D., New trends in air traffic complexity.
To benefit from the potential applications of UAVs, EIWAC 2009, ENRI International Workshop on ATM/CNS, Mar 2009,
Tokyo, Japan. pp 55-60, 2009
geovectoring show promising possibilities for the capacity
management of UAV airspace. A geovector is a three-
component speed vector interval specified for a given area.
Two types of geovectoring can be distinguished: static
geovectoring, as part of a navigation database, and dynamic
geovectoring available as real-time service via a network or
broadcast system.

--- Page 9 ---

ICRAT 2018
List of used symbols
A Area of the airspace
CR Conflict rate
E(x) Expected value of x
GS Ground speed (scalar)
FL Flight Level
L Number of layers or subgroups in an airspace
N Total number of aircraft in an airspace/sector
N Number of conflicts over a given time T
conf
R Horizontal separation minimum, i.e. radius of
protected zone
T Total observation duration
V Speed, speed vector
V Geovector, gives three intervals for an area
geo
VS Vertical speed
h Altitude
hdg Heading
i Iterator, counter
k Constant
lat Latitude
lon Longitude
p Probability to have a conflict per pair of aircraft
2
t Lookahead time of conflict detection
lookahead
α Heading span, or allowed range of headings
χ Track angle, course
VViieeww ppuubblliiccaattiioonn ssttaattss