

--- Page 1 ---

Delft University of Technology
How Do Layered Airspace Design Parameters Affect Airspace Capacity and Safety?
Hoekstra, Jacco; Maas, J.B.; Tra, M.A.P.; Sunil, Emmanuel
Publication date
2016
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript
Published in
7th International Conference on Research in Air Transportation
Citation (APA)
Hoekstra, J., Maas, J. B., Tra, M. A. P., & Sunil, E. (2016). How Do Layered Airspace Design Parameters
Affect Airspace Capacity and Safety? In 7th International Conference on Research in Air Transportation:
Philadelphia, USA
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10.

--- Page 2 ---

How Do Layered Airspace Design Parameters
Affect Airspace Capacity and Safety?
Prof.dr.ir. Jacco M. Hoekstra, Jerom Maas M.Sc.
Martijn Tra B.Sc., Emmanuel Sunil, M.Sc.
Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft
Maintaining separation can therefore be divided into
Abstract—In many ATM studies experiments are two subtasks:
performed to determine the capacity. This paper looks - conflict detection
at the effect of airspace design on the capacity. Using an - conflict resolution
algebraic approach a relation is derived between the
design parameters of a layered airspace design and the
Before the conflict detection & resolution (CD&R),
capacity of the airspace. The validity of the assumptions
there is a third option: prevent conflicts form
which are used in this derivation are tested
happening. This is referred to as conflict prevention.
experimentally. This airspace lay-out proved to be the
airspace design which had the highest capacity for the This takes places before actual conflicts are detected.
unstructured, extremely high traffic demand used in an Air Traffic is organised in such a way that it lowers
earlier experimental study. The result is both a method the chance of conflicts occurring. Airspace design is
to relate an airspace design to the capacity as well as a a way to prevent conflicts.
relation which shows the effect on the airspace capacity
for an airspace design where different levels or layers
Other examples of conflict prevention are:
are defined each with their own segment of heading
- Structuring of air traffic by an air traffic
angles.
controller
- Using the semi-circular rule for headings and
Keywords — Capacity; Air Transportation System
Performance Measurement; Traffic Complexity; altitudes (eastbound at odd levels and
Airspace Design; Conflict Probability; Conflict Rate; westbound at even levels)
Separation Assurance; Safety - Avoiding potential bottle-neck areas
- Limiting the number of aircraft entering an
I. INTRODUCTION airspace
Many studies aim to increase the capacity of Air
Conflict detection and resolution are tasks which are
Traffic Control (ATC) [1] [2] , while others study the
performed by humans and systems, both on the
relation between traffic density and capacity [3] [4].
ground as well as in the air. Different task allocation
This paper is of the second category. Both types of
combinations have become an important topic of
studies acknowledge the strong relation between
ATM research as this might increase the airspace
traffic conflicts and capacity, even though the exact,
capacity or efficiency [5].
analytical relation is not known.
In this paper, the focus is on airspace design. If an
The ultimate goal of Air Traffic Control is to prevent
airspace is designed in a way which lowers the
aircraft from having collisions. Since the exact
potential number of conflicts, the amount of
locations of aircraft are not known to Air Traffic
necessary conflict detections and resolutions
Control, a safety buffer is used in the form of
decreases as well. In this way, the task load on the
separation criteria. When two aircraft actually are
controller, pilot and the systems involved can be
closer to each other than specified in the defined
reduced. The number of conflicts per unit time is
separation criteria, this is called a loss of separation.
called the conflict rate and it is one of the main
limiting factors for the capacity of an airspace.
A conflict, on the other hand, is defined as a
predicted, potential loss of separation within a
Many attempts have been made to find geometrical
specified prediction horizon, also called the look-
metrics to define the capacity of the airspace via the
ahead time. If a conflict is detected, it needs to be
task load considerations. When these metrics are
resolved to prevent the predicted loss of separation
aimed at measuring the load on human air traffic
from actually happening, this is referred to as conflict
controllers, a metric like the so-called Dynamic
resolution.
Density [7], the traffic geometric complexity [8] or
pragmatic variations of these [9] can be used.

--- Page 3 ---

However, as these definitions are very specific, or This equation can also be used to gain insight into the
even require tuning, capacity limits found using these relation between capacity and safety. For example:
approaches are dependent of the level of automation, the effect of decentralizing the task of separation
the task allocation and properties of the specific assurance by moving it to the cockpit reduces the
airspace considered. quadratic relation (2) to a linear relation when both
aircraft are involved in solving a conflict:
Furthermore, future changes in automation or task
allocation may change the metrics for the task load of CR (N 1)p (3a)
local 2
resolving conflicts. However, these metrics will
always be dependent on the conflict rate, and
In words:
therefore on the design of the airspace. Hence,
The local conflict rate is the number of other aircraft,
research on the effects of airspace design on conflict
multiplied with the general chance that any two
rate can lead to increases in airspace capacity.
aircraft meet each other in this specific airspace.
In many projects, capacity limits are based mainly on
The difference between the effect of traffic density on
conflict detection and resolution tasks, and are
the centralised conflict rate on a global and de-
determined experimentally [4] [6]. An example
centralised level can be seen in Figure 1 [11].
which focusses on conflict prevention by airspace
design for extreme traffic densities is the Metropolis
project, where fast-time simulations consisting of Conflict
millions of flights were performed to study the effect rate
1000
of airspace structure effects on capacity [10].
900
800
Next to experimental simulations, theoretical
700
relations between airspace structure and the conflict
r
a
a
ir
t
s
e
p
a
a
r
c
e
e
al
d
s
e
o
s i
n
g
e
n
e d
i
e
s
d .
a
I
n
n
a l
t
y
h
s
i
e
s
d
p a
b
p
y
er t
e
h
x
e
p r
e
e
f
s
f
s
e
i
c
n
t
g ,
o f
t
a
h
n
e
2P
/cP
5
6
0
0
0
0
G
A
r
ir
o und
400
conflict rate in terms of the design parameters of the
300
airspace.
200
100
0
II. THEORETICAL RELATIONS FOR GLOBAL 0 10 20 30 40
CONFLICT RATE Number of aircraft in sector
The relationship between the global conflict rate for
Figure 1 The relation between number of aircraft
an airspace with the total number of aircraft N is
for centralized (’Ground’) conflict rate and
described by [11][12]
decentralized (‘Air’) conflict rate [11]
N When using priority rules, a fail-safe is removed but
CR
global

  2  
p
2
(1)
the overall task load for humans and/or systems is
halved, as only one of each pair of aircraft has to take
This relation can also be written as: action:
1 1
CR  N(N 1)p (2) CR  (N 1)p (3b)
global 2 2 localpriority 2 2
With:
CR global = global conflict rate in an airspace The same equation was later used by Jardin in [13]
N = total number of aircraft in an airspace and [14] to derive p and study the effect of fixed
2
p 2 = average conflict probability for any given routes versus free routing on the conflict rate. Jardin
pair of aircraft in this airspace also added the effect of the average ground speed V,
the lateral separation minimum R for the two-
In words this relation (2) can be summarized as: dimensional case (horizontal flight), the average time
an aircraft spends in the airspace T and the total
FL
The global conflict rate is equal to the number of airspace area A and observation time T . This makes
tot
possible combinations of two aircraft, multiplied with the conflict rate proportional to ratio of the area
the conflict rate for any given pair.

--- Page 4 ---

‘swept’ by the aircraft and the total area of the This airspace concept used the airspace structure as
airspace depicted in Figure 2. Here, the airspace was divided
in vertical segments, and to each layer a span of
V RT aircraft headings was assigned.
CR FL (4) This means that the cruise altitude of an aircraft is
global AT
dependent on the cruise heading. An exception was
tot
made for climbing and descending aircraft, allowing
Imagine that all aircraft fly twice as fast, then the them to reach the level required for their preferred
conflict rate will double as well, as the effect is heading in an efficient way. For the climb and
similar to accelerating the time from a point of view descent phases, a tactical conflict prevention,
of the pilot. Thus, the other aircraft then approach the detection and resolution (CD&R) system was used.
ownship twice as fast. Consequently, the ground
speeds affect the conflict rate via the relative velocity What is the effect of this airspace design on conflict
of the aircraft. rate as expressed using the above equations? To
answers this, two main effects which will be
This example shows that the conflict rate is considered in this paper.
proportional to the relative velocity. As the doubling
example illustrates, this relation also holds on a
global level when we use the average relative
velocity (at larger distances this is equal to the range
rate for conflicting aircraft trajectories). Hence we
can write:
CR V (5)
global rel
p cV (6)
2 rel
In which:
V = relative velocity averaged over a/c pairs
rel
c = constant for a given airspace and number
of aircraft
And effective airspace design performs conflict
prevention by reducing the probability that two
aircraft will have a conflict, in other words: it either
Figure 2. Layers concept as used in
lowers the p , or the V in the above equations. The
2 rel
the Metropolis project for UAVs
above equations form the starting point of the
and Personal Air Transport Vehicles
derivation in this paper.
III. LAYERED AIRSPACE DESIGN AND CONFLICT
A. Spreading effect
PREVENTION
The first effect is that separating the traffic over
In the Metropolis project, the airspace capacity as a
layers changes the combinations of aircraft pairs as
function of the level of structure in the airspace
we now have a vertical segmentation which separates
design has been investigated for extreme traffic
the air traffic.
densities. Scenarios were based on package
delivering UAVs and personal air transport to
Imagine we defined L layers, and we assume that, on
overload an airspace to find capacity limits. In terms
average, the traffic is evenly spread over the layers.
of safety the so-called Layers-airspace concept
This could be achieved by choosing the headings
performed best [10] at a minimal cost in terms of
segments per layer wisely. In case of an uneven
efficiency.
distribution of traffic over headings, more layers
could be assigned to these directions, ensuring an

--- Page 5 ---

efficient use of airspace by evenly distributing the
traffic over the layers. This heading segment represents the maximum
heading difference between two aircraft which could
For each layer we can then write the relation for meet each other in a layer. To see the effect of
conflict rate per layer: heading difference, we consider two aircraft, both
flying with the average ground speed. The relation
1 between the relative velocity and the heading
 
CR  N N 1 p (7) difference follows from the conflict geometry in
layer 2 layer layer layer
Figure 3.
To compute the total expected conflict rate, a In reality the speeds will vary per aircraft
summation can be performed over multiple layers: combination, but when focussing on the global effect
CR   L 1 N  N 1  p of heading difference by using the average ground
global 2 layer layer layer speed V, the relative velocity can be expressed as a
layer1 function of the heading difference:
Equivalently, when it is assumed that aircraft are
spread evenly over all flight levels and the conflict
 hdg 
rate p layer is equal in all layers: V  hdg  2Vsin   (9)
rel

2

1 N 
CR  N

1

p (8)
global 2  L  2 In which:
V
rel
= Relative ground speed (scalar)
We can also see the effect of dividing the traffic over V = Ground speed (scalar)
L layers by comparing this equation to Equation (2).
hdg = Heading difference (absolute value of the
Equation (2) can be seen a s special case for one
layer, i.e. when L=1. difference of direction of two ground
speed vectors)
B. Reduction of relative velocity effect
Next to spreading the traffic over different layers, the
Layers design also uses heading segments per altitude
band. More general we can call this angle, the
heading span of a layer α (alpha). In the example in
Figure 2, the segment is 45 degrees or in other words:
α = π/4. As the 360 degrees (2π) of all possible
headings was evenly divided, 8 segments and two
sets of 8 layers were used. The result is: L=16 with α
= π/4.
Figure 4: The absolute value of subtracting two
Figure 3. Geometric relation between heading
uniform distribution results in a triangular
difference for two aircraft with the same ground
distribution
speed

--- Page 6 ---

Please note that in Equation (9) it is assumed that all 4cV  2 
aircraft fly with the same ground speed and the p  1 sin  (19)
layer    2
aircraft are flying towards the same point in time.
Although the actual geometry can be very different
p 4cV
1
1
2
sin

 (20)
when the aircraft miss each other at a large distance, layer   2
those cases do not have to be included for the conflict
rate. Two generalisations are made: identical, or Since the main goal of this derivation is to analyse
similar, ground speed and the distance to the CPA is the effect of the heading segment α, we move the
much larger than the separation criteria. other aspects to a constant k for now.
The average relative velocity within a single layer 1 2 
can be calculated based on the distribution of heading p k  1 sin  (21)
differences in that layer. Assuming a uniform
layer   2
distribution of the headings within a layer, the
resulting probability density function for the heading
difference becomes a triangular distribution as
illustrated in Figure 4.
IV. COMBINING THE SPREADING EFFECT AND
RELATIVE VELOCITY EFFECT
The resulting probability density function (pdf) for
the heading difference is described by: Combining the equation (8) and (20) gives the total
effect of the airspace structure for N aircraft with L
2 x 2 layers based on reducing the heading segments α.
Phdg  x 1  x (10)
      2 CR  1 N N 1   1 1 2 sin  k (22)
   
global 2  L    2
Using stochastic calculus, this distribution function
for the heading difference can be used to calculate the
average relative velocity. This is done by integrating This equation shows the distinct influence of the two
the product of relative velocity as function of the beneficial effects of a layered airspace structure
heading difference with the probability distribution based on heading segments.
function for the relative heading using equation (9)
and (10): 1 N  1 2 
CR  N 1  1 sin   k (22)
p cV (11) global 2  L    2
layer rel other influences
 spreading effect reduced relative velocity effect
p  P(|hdgx|)cV (|hdgx|)dx (12)
layer rel
0
 2 x This equation can also be used when no restrictions
p cV  xsin dx (13) on heading are applied, substituting L=1 and α=2π, in
layer 2 2
0 which case it returns to the form similar to that of
2cV  x Equation (8):
p   xsin dx (14)
layer 2 2
0 1 k
2cV  x  x  CR  NN 1  (23)
p  sin dx  xsin dx (15) global 2 2
layer 2

2 2

0 0
2cV  x   x x  Combining this equation with Equation (22) given
p   2cos  2xcos 4sin  (16) the relation between the conflict rate with layers and
layer 2     2   0   2 2   0   the conflict rate without the layers:
p layer  4  cV 2       cos  2         cos  2 2sin  2       (17)   CR global   L   CR global   L1  L N (N   L 1)  2     1  2 sin  2    (24)
spreading factor heading segment factor
p 
4cV 
2sin

 (18)
layer 2  2

--- Page 7 ---

The effect of the semi-circular rule can now be Solving this yields:
expressed in factors as well, when compared to
aircraft with all possible headings flying at the same 1 1 8LCR
N  L L2 max
altitude. Assume an airspace with 100 aircraft, and 10 max 2 2 k f()
segments: 5 for eastbound traffic and 5 for
westbound traffic. Equation 25 then shows the effect 1 2 
with f() 1 sin  (29)
of using this rule, as N=100, L=10 and α=π:   2
10010 2 2 
  CR global   L   CR global   L1  1099     1  sin 2   Finally, Equation (26) can also be combined with the
Equation (4) to incorporate the ratio between the area
spreading factor heading segment factor
searched for conflicts and the total area of the
CR  0.090.73 (25)
 global
L1
airspace. In this way, all relevant airspace design
parameters have been considered:
This shows that in this example, using the semi- VRT 1 N 
circular rule reduces the conflict rate with a factor of
CR
global
k
AT
FL
2
N
 L
1

f()
15. It also shows that splitting the airspace into 10 tot
layers has the largest effect (91% reduction), while with f()
1
1
2
sin

 (30)
using only two heading segments results in a   2
reduction of 27%. With:
The table below shows the heading effect for a k* constant
number of heading segment sizes:
V= average ground speed
Table 1. Heading segment αeffect T = average time spent in airspace
FL
on conflict rate
T = total time span
tot
alpha (deg) Conflict
A =area of airspace
reduction
360 0% N = total number of aircraft
180 27% L = number of subdivions (layers)
90 60%
 = heading range per subdivision of airspace
45 80%
22.5 90%
When no heading segments are used, the value of α is
10 95% 360 degrees, making f(α) equal to 1/2π (the 2π is
accounted for in the constant k). Any equal
Assuming there is a maximum allowable conflict subdivision of airspace can be expressed in terms of
rate, equation (22) can also be used to determine the the number of layers L.
capacity:
A number of assumptions were made along the way
1 N  in the derivation. They are summarized below:
CR k N 1 f()
global 2  L  1. The conflict probability of two aircraft is
proportional to their relative velocity
1 2 
with f() 1 sin  (26) 2. The ground speed of each aircraft is equal
  2
3. The aircraft do not make turns
We can use equation (26) to determine the capacity:
V. VALIDATION
1 N2 
CR  k f() N (27)
To test the validity of equation (30) a number of
max 2  L  simulations were run. In these simulations, the focus
is on the function f(a). The independent variable was
1 2CR
N2N  max 0 (28) thus the heading span a of the simulated layer.
L k f()
In each simulation an airspace was formed and
aircraft were created in this airspace. After the

--- Page 8 ---

random initial condition, conflicts are counted within theoretical line follows hypothesis 1: this relation is
the look-ahead time. After each count, the next assumed to be linear. The results can be seen in
iteration was started. The experiment parameters are Figure 5.
given in table 2.
Number of aircraft: 150
Initial aircraft position: R a n d o m ( u n i form) in
creation region
Creation region size: 1500 nm x 1500 nm
Ground speed : 400 kts
Heading: Random (uniform) in
heading span [0, a]
Protected zone radius: 5 nm
Number of simulations: 10000 - 100000
Table 2: Experiment parameters
As the goal is to analyse how many conflict arise per
Figure 6: Experimental(red) and theoretical(blue)
time unit, initial intrusions are avoided in the start
relations between heading span and conflict count.
condition as a zero relative speed should correspond
with a conflict rate of zero.
It is found that this relation does indeed follow the
The remaining constant k in the relation (30) is
expected pattern: the conflict count is proportional to
independent of a. In order to compare the theoretical
V . Next, the effect conflict relation (30) is tested.
and experimental conflict rates, it is assigned a scalar rel
Now, the V is not given on the x-axis, but the
value. The value of k is used as a scaling parameter. rel
heading span a of the layer. The result is seen in
Figure 6. The experimental data in the scatter plot are
In the following figures, both the theoretical and
sorted in bins of 10 degrees heading span width. Of
experimental relations are plotted next to each other.
each bin the average conflict count is computed, and
The blue line is the theoretical relation between the
the result is a line, indicated in figure 7. Here it can
dependent and independent variables. The red dots
be seen that the theoretical prediction of conflict
show a scatter plot, where each simulation is
count (Equation 30) closely matches the experimental
represented as one point. The scatter plots contain
simulation results
10,000 points, as 10,000 different simulations were
performed.
Figure 7: Averaging the data points from only
several experiment runs allows to compare the
Figure 5: Experimental and theoretical relations
experimental(red) and theoretical(blue) relations for
between V and conflict count
rel heading span per layer and conflict count
First the average relative velocity is plotted against
the conflict rate. This tests the relation between the VI. CONCLUSIONS
average relative velocity magnitude in one
The conflict rate in an airspace is proportional to the
simulation, and the number of conflicts. The
conflict probability and hence it is an indication for

--- Page 9 ---

safety. The conflict rate is, in turn, proportional to the heading differences analytically is more widely
relative velocity. applicable. It is also an addition to the many
empirical traffic complexity weighing factors which
Using the conflict probability model for direct is more fundamental, The method presented here for
routing airspace from [11] as a starting point, a one type os airspace design, can be used to relate
relation that connects the conflict rate with the design many other, more4 conventional, airspace design
parameters of a layered airspace concept has been parameters, air traffic complexity and capacity to
found. This function has been derived using the each other in many different ways. Future research
equations for 2D conflict geometry, probability can use this relative speed and relative heading effect
distributions and the assumptions that aircraft fly method to find similar relations, both generic and
straight paths with constant velocities. geo-specific for a variety of airspaces..
For L layers, each with a heading segment of α
REFERENCES
degrees, the conflict rate can be expressed as: [1] R. Irvine, “Investigating the capacity benefit of airborne
speed adjustment”, FAA/Eurcontrol ATM Seminar 2015,
Lissabon, 2015
1 N  1 2  VRT
CR  N 1 1 sin  FL k [2] S. Ruiz, M.Soler, “Conflict pattern analysis under the
global 2  L    2 AT consideration of optimal trajectories in the European ATM”,
tot FAA/Eurcontrol ATM Seminar 2015, Lissabon, 2015
[3] P. Brooker,”Control Workload, Airspace Capcity and Future
In this equation the symbols have the following Systems”, Human Factors and Aerospace Safety 3(1), 2003
meaning: [4] G. Tobaruela, A. Majumbar, W.Y. Ochieng, “Identifying
Airspace Capacity Factors in the Air Traffic Management
System”, ATACCS’2012, London, 2012
L : number of layers
[5] M. IJtsma, J.M.Hoekstra, R. Bhattacharyya, A. Prittchett
N : global number of aircraft
“Computational Assessment of Different Air-Ground
α : heading span of a layer Allocations”, 11th FAA/Eurocontrol ATM Seminar,
V : average ground speed of aircraft Lissabon, 2015
R : horizontal separation requirement [6] K.J.Leiden, P.Kopardekar, S. Green, “Controller Workload
T : time spent in airspace Analysis Methodology to Predict Increases in Airspace
FL Capacity“, AIAA 3rd ATIO Tech 2003, Denver, 2003
T : total observation/experiment time span
tot [7] P. Kopardekar, A. Schwarz, S. Magyarits, J. Rhodes,
A : area of the airspace
“Airspace Complexity Measurement: An Air Traffic Control
k : constant for airspace structure aspects Simulation Analysis”, International Journal of Industrial
Engineering, 16(1), 2009
The equation consists of three distinct elements. In [8] D. Delahaye, S. Puechmorel, “Air Traffic Complexity:
Towards Intrinsic Metrics”, 3rd, FAA/Eurocontrol ATM
the first factor, the conflict rate is reduced as a
Seminar, Napoli, 2000
consequence of spreading the traffic over multiple
[9] G.M. Flynn, C. Leleu, B. Hilburn, “A Compelxity Study of
layers. The second factor is a reduction of conflict
the Maastricht Upper Airpsace Centre”, EEC Report No. 403,
rate due to the sorting of aircraft in each layer by Project COCA, Eurocontrol Experiment Centre, Brétigny,
heading. Combining this with the results by Jardin 2006
[14] results in an additional, third, factor, which [10] E. Sunil, J.M.Hoekstra, J. Ellerbroek, et al, “Metropolis:
Relating Airspace Strcuture and Cacpacity for Extreme
accounts for other effects such as the size, the traffic
Traffic Densities“, 11th FAA/Eurocontrol ATM Seminar,
ground speed and structure of the airspace. Lissabon, 2015[13]
[11] J.M. Hoekstra, R.C.J. Ruigrok, R.N.H.W. van Gent, “Free
A validation was performed by computer simulations, Flight in Crowded Airspace?”,3rd FAA/Eurocontrol ATM
which show strong correlations between theoretical Seminar, Napoli, 2000
and experimental results. [12] J.M. Hoekstra, “Designing for Safety: Free Flight with
Airborne Separation Assurance”, Doctoral Thesis, TU Delft,
Delft, 2001
Future research can build on this work by further
[13] M.R. Jardin, “Air Traffic Conflict Models”, AIAA ATIO
expanding or detailing this relation. For instance, forum, Chicago, 2004
additional dependencies on the model constant k , [14] M.R. Jardin, “Analytical relationships between Conflict
such different variations in the ground speeds and Counts and Air Traffic Density”, Journal of Guidance,
Control and Dynamics, Vol. 28, No.6, 2005
including the effect of descending and climbing
traffic through cruise layers.
The given relation, can be used for vertical
segmentations of airspaces. The followed method of
using the distributions of relative velocities and