

--- Page 1 ---

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/373841565
MALE RPAS Integration into European Airspace: Real-Time Simulation
Analysis of Operations with Detect and Avoid
Conference Paper · October 2023
DOI: 10.1109/DASC58513.2023.10311194
CITATION READS
1 331
9 authors, including:
Emmanuel Sunil Timothy Bleakley
Netherlands Aerospace Centre General Atomics
38 PUBLICATIONS 566 CITATIONS 7 PUBLICATIONS 26 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Eric Theunissen Marieke Suijkerbuijk
Ministry of Defense, Netherlands Netherlands Aerospace Centre
157 PUBLICATIONS 843 CITATIONS 7 PUBLICATIONS 37 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Emmanuel Sunil on 12 September 2023.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- Page 2 ---

MALE RPAS Integration into European Airspace:
Real-Time Simulation Analysis of Operations with
Detect and Avoid
Emmanuel Sunil†, Timothy Bleakley‡, Erik Theunissen§, Erik-Jan Hartlieb†, Paul Kuiper†,
Marieke Suijkerbuijk†, Jan Karssies†, Tim Dufourmont† and Jacomijn van Ham†
Email: Emmanuel.Sunil@nlr.nl, Timothy.Bleakley@ga-asi.nl, E.Theunissen@uav.nl
†Royal Netherlands Aerospace Centre (NLR), Amsterdam, The Netherlands
‡General Atomics Aeronautical Systems Inc (GA-ASI), Poway, California, USA
§Information Systems Delft (ISD), Leiderdorp, The Netherlands
Abstract—This paper details the third Real-Time of specified dimensions allocated for exclusive use to a
Simulation (RTS) experiment carried out by NLR, GA-ASI, specific user” [1], and limit their ability to operate Beyond
and ISD to investigate the Air Traffic Control (ATC) Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS). To address this challenge,
procedures required to safely integrate Medium Altitude Long several SESAR and EDA projects are working towards
Endurance (MALE) Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems developing comprehensive procedures to enable MALE
(RPAS) into European civilian airspace. The focus was on the RPAS operations in unsegregated European airspace [2-7].
usage of Detect and Avoid (DAA), a key technology that helps
Similar efforts are underway in the United States [8-10].
remote pilots to electronically ‘see’ the traffic situation
surrounding their aircraft. The DAA procedures described in One of the primary concerns in integrating RPAS into
RTCA DO-365B were tested using two NLR simulators: the civil airspace is the physical separation between the RPAS
NLR ATC Research Simulator (NARSIM) for ATC pilot and the aircraft, which prevents them from fulfilling
simulation, and the Multi UAS Supervision Testbed (MUST) their legal obligation to visually detect and avoid collisions
for RPAS simulation. The GA-ASI Conflict Prediction and with other traffic, as stipulated in the Rules of the Air. This
Display System (CPDS) supplied the DAA function, which limitation necessitates the development of alternative
meets RTCA DO-365B requirements. In an enhancement to solutions. Detect and Avoid (DAA) systems have been
our previous experiments, the DAA system now included
developed to provide RPAS pilots with the ability to
TCAS II v7.1 collision avoidance logic and could automatically
"electronically see" and assess other traffic using data from
execute TCAS resolution advisories in lost link situations.
onboard sensors. DAA systems enable RPAS pilots to
Scenarios considered conflicts in controlled and uncontrolled
comply with the Rules of the Air, including Right of Way
airspace, during RPAS aerial work, in the Terminal
rules, by providing a real-time picture of the traffic situation
Maneuvering Area (TMA) of Rotterdam airport and in
around their aircraft. These systems also offer Remain Well
Amsterdam Sector South. Three air traffic controllers, five
Clear (RWC) and Collision Avoidance (CA) cues to enhance
airline pilots, and an active MALE RPAS pilot participated in
the experiment. The RPAS pilot had to evaluate alerts, liaise the safety of RPAS operations. Consequently, DAA is
with ATC, and take suitable action as per DO-365B procedures considered a critical enabling technology for the full
to resolve conflicts. The results indicated that DAA improved integration of MALE RPAS into unsegregated airspace and
the RPAS pilot's situational awareness, and its value was even facilitate routine BVLOS operations.
more evident in uncontrolled airspace, particularly during
Despite the development and testing of technical
interactions with non-cooperative intruders. After automatic
standards for DAA [10], limited real-world experience with
execution of TCAS resolution advisories during lost link,
DAA operational procedures among Air Traffic Controllers
controllers preferred the RPAS to automatically revert to its
(ATCOs) and pilots hampers its effective implementation,
last cleared altitude to reduce the likelihood of secondary
conflicts and ease controller workload. Several particularly in busy unsegregated civilian airspaces. To
recommendations have been proposed, including additional bridge this gap, the Royal Netherlands Aerospace Center
DAA alert types for terminal area conflicts, and adherence to (NLR), in collaboration with General Atomics Aeronautical
right of way rules by RPAS pilots to enhance predictability Systems Inc. (GA-ASI) and Information Systems Delft
during DAA encounters. (ISD), is conducting Real-Time Simulation (RTS)
experiments. These simulations involve experienced ATCOs,
Keywords—Detect and Avoid (DAA), Collision Avoidance, RPAS and airline pilots, and aim to replicate realistic
Real-Time Simulation (RTS), Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS), conditions in Dutch airspace. The insights gained from these
Airspace Integration experiments not only contribute to the evaluation of DAA
operational procedures but also aid policy makers and
I. INTRODUCTION regulators in their decision-making process, with the
objective of accelerating the integration of MALE RPAS into
The integration of Medium Altitude Long Endurance
European airspace, while ensuring compliance with the
(MALE) Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) into
Rules of the Air.
civilian airspace is essential for their widespread use in
various applications ranging from infrastructure inspection to This paper presents the design and results of the third
search and rescue. However, existing regulatory restrictions RTS campaign conducted in June 2022, which focuses on
confine MALE RPAS to segregated airspace, i.e., “airspace evaluating DAA operational procedures. Scenarios
considered both the RWC and CA components of DAA, and
This research was funded by General Atomics Aeronautical Systems

--- Page 3 ---

thus various conflict scenarios in controlled and uncontrolled be able to comply with all four layers of safety. Although
airspaces, as well as en-route and Terminal Maneuvering MALE RPAS may carry the same Communications,
Area settings were simulated. The experiment also evaluated Navigation and airspace Surveillance (CNS) equipment as
procedures for conflicts during lost link situations that their manned counterparts, there is one critical difference: the
require the RPAS to automatically execute CA maneuvers pilot is not on-board. Consequently, the pilot cannot ‘see and
computed by the onboard Traffic Collision Avoidance avoid’ other aircraft by looking out of the flight deck.
System (TCAS II v7.1). Because RTCA DAA procedures Instead, he/she needs a technological means to perform both
were considered to be more mature at the start of this project, the self-separation and CA tasks. The technological means to
experiment participants were instructed to use the procedures perform both these functions are often referred to as Detect
described in RTCA DO-365B [11] in order to evaluate and and Avoid (DAA). As an extension to our previous work,
recommend improvements to these procedures, particularly this paper focuses on the operational procedures needed for
when considering operations in European airspace. Note that both RWC and CA.
future studies are planned to consider differences between
RTCA and EUROCAE standards for DAA. B. Detect and Avoid
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides As mentioned before, a DAA system provides an RPAS pilot
the reader with background information about DAA. The with Remain Well Clear (RWC) and Collision Avoidance
design of the experiment is described in Section 3. The (CA) cues. The system considered in this experiment is a so
results of the most interesting experiment scenarios are called class 2 DAA system with class 5 capability as per the
presented and analyzed in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes classification scheme in RTCA DO-365B [11]. Class 2
the main conclusions of the present study, and describes systems provide RWC and CA alerts using cooperative and
topics that are planned for future research. noncooperative sensors onboard the RPAS. CA is performed
by the well-known Traffic Collision Avoidance System,
TCAS II v7.1, that generates vertical resolution advisories.
II. BACKGROUND
The class 5 capability adds RWC alerting and guidance in
the terminal area. The DAA system considered here provides
A. Layers of Safety in ATM
the following functions:
Today’s Air Traffic Management (ATM) system uses
four safety layers to prevent mid-air collisions: pre-flight • Cooperative traffic detection. Hybrid surveillance, a
function of TCAS II equipment, interrogates and locates
strategic planning, separation provision service, self-
aircraft with Mode C and/or Mode S transponders,
separation, and last-resort Collision Avoidance (CA); see
including those also equipped with ADS-B. Separately,
Fig. 1. The first layer, pre-flight strategic planning, uses
the ADS-B In receives the traffic information from all
methods like airspace design to prevent conflicts before take-
ADS-B-equipped aircraft.
off. However, uncertainties often arise, such as weather-
based diversions, requiring the second layer: separation • Non-cooperative traffic detection. The air-to-air radar
(ATAR) detects all traffic, including those without
provision service. This is carried out by Air Traffic Control
transponders, within a range of approx. 6 miles, within
Officers (ATCOs) with the assistance of radar and
±110° in azimuth and ±15° in elevation from the
automation.
longitudinal axis of the RPAS.
• Aircraft tracking. The tracker correlates data from the
different surveillance sensors to estimate the most likely
position of all detected aircraft. It also calculates the
speed of aircraft that are not self-reporting velocity via
ADS-B.
• Cockpit display of traffic information (CDTI). Tracked
aircraft within the pilot-selected horizontal and vertical
range are shown on a traffic display, with symbols
depicting the alert status of the track, its direction and
speed (if known) and climb or descent. Traffic ID and
relative altitude are displayed on an accompanying label.
• Self-separation alerting. RTCA DO-365B defines
Fig. 1: Layers of safety in ATM quantitative separation requirements for self-separation
known as DAA Well Clear (DWC). Different DWC
The third layer, self-separation, requires pilots to avoid
values are used for cooperative versus non-cooperative
other aircraft visually, and it is primarily used in
traffic in the en-route environment, and for all traffic in
uncontrolled airspace. The final layer employs CA systems the terminal area. When a loss of DWC is predicted on
such as the Traffic Alert and Collision and Avoidance the UA’s current trajectory within a predefined look-
System II (TCAS II). It identifies potential collisions by ahead time, a DAA alert is triggered. If a loss of DWC is
interrogating transponders on surrounding aircraft and gives predicted within 75 seconds, a corrective (yellow) alert is
pilots alerts and resolution advisories. issued. If a loss of DWC is predicted within 55 seconds,
a warning (red) alert is issued. A preventive (yellow)
As a result of these four safety layers, mid-air collisions alert is issued if a violation of horizontal DWC minimum
are extremely rare in today’s ATM system. To ensure that is predicted within 75 seconds, and the conflicting traffic
the introduction of RPAS does not affect , RPAS must also is near but outside the vertical DWC minimum.

--- Page 4 ---

• Standard self-separation guidance. The standard method is within the yellow conflict probe areas. Prior to this,
of displaying self-separation guidance is using colored CPDS will have issued a DAA Warning alert, and the
guidance bands on the heading ring and altitude tape of remote pilot’s attention should be on the traffic display
the CDTI. Bands on the heading ring indicate directions already. There is no additional alert on loss of DWC.
where a DAA alert would occur at the current altitude. Guidance bands may not help in this situation, because
The band color corresponds to the corrective (yellow) or clear trajectories, if any are shown, are likely to be
warning (red) level of the alert. Bands on the vertical tape unreachable within the remaining timescale of the
indicate altitudes at which a DAA alert would be issued conflict. CPDS’s conflict probes still help the remote
on the current heading. Directions and altitudes with no pilot. The yellow and red zones help the remote pilot to
guidance band indicate trajectories predicted to be free of determine the turn and/or climb/descent maneuver that
conflict. RPAS pilots are expected to steer their aircraft will most quickly increase separation from the conflicting
towards a trajectory clear of guidance bands if a conflict traffic.
alert is triggered, while respecting right of way rules.
• Enhanced self-separation guidance. GA-ASI’s DAA
III. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
display, known as the Conflict Prediction and Display
A. Simulators
System (CPDS), includes additional symbology known
as “ conflict probes”. These probes depict conflict areas For this series of projects, NLR use two of its
in plan and vertical sections, as shown in Error! simulators, namely the NLR ATM Research Simulator
Reference source not found.. Yellow areas indicate the (NARSIM) and the Multi UAS Supervision Testbed
space relative to RPAS position and velocity where loss (MUST).
of DWC would occur. Red areas indicate where there is
1) NLR ATM Research Simulator (NARSIM)
risk of near mid-air collision (NMAC).
NARSIM was developed to evaluate new ATC
procedures, automation tools and ATCO Human-Machine
Interfaces (HMIs). To this end it simulates the most
important aspects of a real ATC system, including realistic
radar data and aircraft behavior. It offers multiple ATCO and
pseudo-pilot working positions.
In this study, NARSIM Radar (for Approach and en-
route Area Control Center simulation) and NARSIM Tower
(for airport simulation) were utilized; see Fig. 3. The built-in
Radio Telephony (R/T) system emulated VHF voice
communications among ATCOs, pseudo pilots, and the
RPAS pilot, and simulated a landline connection as a backup
communication method in case of C2 Lost Link and R/T loss
scenarios.
Fig. 2: The GA-ASI Conflict Prediction and Display System (CPDS) with
DWC and TCAS RA guidance
a) The NARSIM Radar simulator
• Collision avoidance alerting and guidance for
cooperative traffic. The Class 2 Detect and Avoid
(DAA) system offers Resolution Advisories (RAs) for
transponder-equipped aircraft that meet the criteria of the
TCAS II collision avoidance. The RAs suggest a
particular ascent or descent rate to maximize vertical
distance from any conflicting aircraft. Typically
represented as red "avoid" and green "fly to" zones on a
display, these advisories can be automatically executed if
the TCAS is integrated with the flight control system.
• Collision avoidance alerting and guidance for non-
cooperative traffic. For non-cooperative aircraft, a loss b) The NARSIM Tower simulator with Rotterdam airport
of DWC means that the separation provision has failed to scenery
maintain separation minima, and the conflicting aircraft Fig. 1: The NLR ATC Research Simulator (NARSIM)
are now in a collision avoidance regime, which is
NARSIM was updated for this study with a TCAS II
referred to as “Regain DWC”. The RPAS pilot will
v7.1 model as described in [12], allowing aircraft
know when DWC is lost when CPDS indicates the RPAS

--- Page 5 ---

participation in coordinated conflict avoidance (CA) Two major updates were made to MUST for this project.
resolutions. The system's conflict detection was based on Firstly, the flight dynamics model now accounts for wind
Mode-S transponder data and it could respond to conflicts effects on RPAS motion, adjusting AP and FMS accordingly.
from the RPAS simulated on the MUST simulator. A TCAS Wind was added because it can affect the effectiveness of the
RA downlink feature was implemented, providing ATCOs selected DWC maneuvers. Secondly, a TCAS II v7.1 model
with information about ongoing Resolution Advisories (RAs) was added to provide vertical resolution advisories during
next to the corresponding aircraft's label. Despite its usage in CA encounters based on [12]. The implementation can also
the experiments, RA downlink isn't available for ATC in the automatically enact TCAS RAs during lost link scenarios.
Netherlands as of now.
B. MALE RPAS and Related Assumptions
2) Multi UAS Supervision Testbed (MUST)
The Multi UAS Supervision Testbed (MUST), a The GA-ASI MQ-9B SkyGuardian was used as the
MALE RPAS platform in this study. A 3D model of this
reconfigurable generic RPAS research simulation facility
aircraft was provided by GA-ASI; see Fig. 3. Additionally,
developed by NLR, comprises two main components: a
the kinematics model in the MUST simulator was adapted to
flight dynamics simulator and an RPAS Pilot Station (RPS);
match the performance of the SkyGuardian; see Table 1.
see Fig. 4. For this study, the GA-ASI CPDS is integrated
into MUST to provide the RPAS pilot with Detect and Avoid
(DAA) cues.
MUST features two control modes: Autopilot (AP) and
Flight Management System (FMS). AP mode enables
independent adjustment and activation of RPAS heading,
altitude, speed, and vertical speed values, including initiation
of circular loiter patterns. FMS mode allows automated
waypoint navigation along a predefined route, with control
inputs accepted via touchscreen, keyboard, mouse, or Fig. 3: The General Atomics SkyGuardian MALE RPAS
HOTAS. An Automatic Take-Off and Landing System TABLE 1: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE GA-ASI SKYGUARDIAN MALE RPAS
(ATLS) is simulated in MUST, and a range-and-bearing tool
Characteristic Value
is provided on the moving map display.
Maximum Take-Off Weight 5,670 kg
Length 11.7 m
Wingspan 24 m
Ceiling FL 400
Cruise speed 122 kts
Max speed 210 kts
Additionally, the simulation was developed with the
following MALE RPAS related assumptions:
• The RPAS has all CNS equipment required for IFR
flights. It always operates as an IFR aircraft, even under
VMC.
• The RPAS has a single C2 link. The C2 link transmits
pilot commands from the RPS to the RPAS, and
transmits telemetry data from the RPAS to the RPS. The
C2 link is also used for voice communications (R/T).
• The RPAS has an Automatic Take-Off and Landing
System (ATLS). The pilot can manually abort ATLS
actions if required.
• The RPAS is flown with the pilot in the loop, except in
the case of C2 lost link.
Fig 2: The NLR Multi UAS Supervision Testbed (MUST)
• The RPAS automatically changes its transponder code to
Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) 7400 after a predefined time interval during C2 lost link.
and ATAR models facilitate conflict detection in MUST. • The RPAS has an onboard Detect and Avoid (DAA)
The ADS-B sensor was modelled as described in [13] , and system that is capable of tracking both cooperative and
has a max reception range of 100 NM with a 1 Hz update non-cooperative intruders.
rate. The ATAR model complies with the minimum • The RPAS has TCAS onboard that execute RAs
specifications [14] and had a max range of 6 NM, an automatically during lost link situations.
azimuth of ±110o, an elevation of ±15o and an update rate of • The RPS has primary and secondary backup voice
1 Hz. The system uses a best source tracker, preferring ADS- communication systems that can used to contact ATC
B data and utilizing ATAR tracks for non-cooperative during C2 lost link and R/T voice failures.
targets. • The RPAS is single engined.

--- Page 6 ---

C. Airport and Airspace • Scenarios that overload an ATCO. This was considered
Rotterdam The Hague Airport (ICAO: EHRD) was used to be more suitable in the TMA than in en-route airspace
as the case-study airport in this study. EHRD is a busy single because en-route ATCOs receive STCA support.
runway civilian airport with a mix of both IFR and VFR • Use special instructions for ATCOs, remote pilot and
traffic. Runway 24, with a length of 2,200 meters was used airline pilots when necessary to increase the likelihood of
for all simulation runs; see Fig. 4. a conflict.
Using this approach, a total of 16 encounter geometries
were designed. For several geometries, multiple variations
were developed. These encounter geometries were tested in
the simulator by NLR staff to select the most challenging
geometries for the actual experiment with ATCOs and pilots.
The difficulty of scenarios was gauged based on the
anticipated workload of an RPAS pilot and their situational
awareness required to use the DAA display to resolve the
conflicts. Influencing factors included the time to loss of
DWC, RPAS flight phase, surrounding traffic and wind
conditions.
Fig. 4: Layout of the Rotterdam airport [source: Google Maps] The six most challenging encounter geometries were
All background VFR and IFR traffic, i.e., non-RPAS further elaborated into full 45-minute scenarios. Over two
traffic, used standard Air Traffic Services (ATS) routes as days, these scenarios were tested with professional ATCOs
defined in the Netherlands Aviation Information Publication and pilots. The final experiment scenarios are listed in the
(AIP). To this end, all ATS routes within the following Table 3.
airspace regions were modelled for the experiment. Table 2 TABLE 3: EXPERIMENT SCENARIOS
lists the airspace regions considered. Background traffic had
different callsigns and routes in every scenario to avoid # Scenario Name Airspace Type
learning effects for the experiment participants. 1 Head-on conflict En-route DWC
TABLE 2: AIRSPACE REGIONS MODELLED IN THE RTS 2 Crossing conflict at the En-route CA
intersection of two airways
Airspace
Airspace Name Altitudes 3 Aerial work parallel to an
Class En-route DWC
airway
Rotterdam CTR Class C GND – 3000 ft
4 Sandwich conflict on final
TMA DWC
Rotterdam TMA 1 Class E 1500 ft – 5500 ft by 2 VFRs
Schiphol TMA 1 Class A 1500 ft – 9500 ft 5 Lost C2 link TMA CA
6 Ad-hoc aerial-work with
Amsterdam Sector TMA DWC
Class A 9500 ft – 19500 ft VFR intruders
South
Uncontrolled outside E. Experiment Participants
Class G GND – 1500 ft
Rotterdam CTR The main participants involved in the experiment are
listed in Table 3. Note that the ACC ATCO only participated
in the en-route scenarios. Many of the participants, including
To facilitate conflicts, the RPAS did not use standard Air
the RPAS pilot and the ATCOs, were involved in the
Traffic Services (ATS) routes. Instead, a different route was
previous experiments in this series of projects.
designed for the RPAS for each scenario.
TABLE 3: MAIN EXPERIMENT PARTICIPANTS
D. Experiment scenarios
# Role Notes
Conflict encounters for the experiment were developed
with the assistance of a DAA expert from ISD and two Active RNLAF MQ9A pilot with 8+
1 RPAS Pilot
ATCOs with operational experience in the airspace under years of flight experience
consideration. Developing encounters that could be recreated
2 TWR ATCO Retired with 30+ years of experience
during the experiment was extremely challenging because
3 APP ATCO Retired with 35+ years of experience
DAA alerts occur in controlled airspace only if ATCOs fail
to notice a conflict in time, which is extremely rare. This is 4 ACC ATCO Retired with 35+ years of experience
even more difficult in en-route airspace where controllers are 5 Pseudo Pilot Active 737 instructor, Ex F50 pilot
supported with the Short-Term Conflict Alert (STCA)
6 Pseudo Pilot Active MD11F pilot
system which identifies potential conflicts with a look-ahead
7 Pseudo Pilot Active A320 pilot
time of 120 seconds. After consultation with the ATCOs
involved in the design process, the following types of 8 Pseudo Pilot Retired B777 pilot
scenarios were used: 9 Pseudo Pilot Active General Aviation pilot
• Blunders made by both the RPA and the other traffic.
This was considered the best way to trigger the conflicts, F. Participant Training
and most encounter scenarios used this approach. Prior to the experiment, all experiment participants were
• Multiple intruder aircraft options for triggering a conflict trained to use their respective part of the MRRF over a full
to take into account the timing uncertainties of a RTS. day. Additionally, all experiment participants were briefed

--- Page 7 ---

on DAA, as well as on their expected responses to different conflicts, are not described below. Nonetheless, the
DAA alerts according to RTCA. questionnaire results of the baseline scenarios are used in the
analysis that follows for comparative purposes.
The training for the RPAS pilot consisted of two main
parts: MUST familiarization and CPDS usage. A DAA
expert who led the development of CPDS provided the A. Head-On Conflict in En-Route Airspace
RPAS pilot with a tutorial on how to use CPDS, including
1) Conflict Description
the appropriate responses for the different RWC alerts as
In this scenario, three eastbound airliners were inbound
specified in RTCA DO-365B. This training was performed
to Rotterdam. The RPAS was departed Rotterdam on a route
using a number of dedicated conflict scenarios that
that crosses below the flightpath of the inbound traffic. The
highlighted the features and correct utilization CPDS.
third airliner mistakenly responded to the descent clearance
of the aircraft ahead, initiating the conflict with the RPAS.
G. Experiment Procedure
The sequence of events, see Fig.7, were as follows:
Experiment participants were briefed before each
scenario. The briefing was divided into two parts: first, all • The RPAS was cleared for a stepped climb to FL140
participants were given the RPAS route and basic details after taking off from Rotterdam.
about the scenario. The second part, intended only for pilots, • The en-route ATCO directed the second airliner,
contained detailed information about the anticipated conflict KLM211, to descend to FL60 after crossing the RPAS,
between the RPAS and the intruder aircraft. This part also which was at FL140.
included specific instructions to help instigate conflicts, • KLM121, the third airliner at FL160, blundered and
including the "blunders" the pilots were expected to commit.
began descending. CPDS initially projected the intruder
In order to elicit authentic conflict responses, the ATCOs
to pass behind the RPAS.
were not informed beforehand about the conflicts that would
• KLM121 suddenly increased its descent rate. It was now
arise during each run.
expected to cross in front of the RPAS. This triggered a
Each scenario was followed by a debriefing session DWC corrective (yellow) alert on CPDS with a time to
during which the experiment participants explained the CPA of just 18 seconds; see Fig. 8.
timeline of events, and their decision-making process. These • The RPAS pilot initiated a left turn to resolve the alert,
discussions led to specific recommendations towards without ATC clearance
improving the procedures for operations with RWC and for
• During the turn, a "monitor vertical speed" TCAS RA
the contingency situations considered.
was triggered for the RPAS. The remote pilot didn't
notice the RA and continued the left turn.
H. Questionnaires
• Almost simultaneously, the intruding aircraft received
The ATCOs and the RPAS pilot were requested to fill in and obeyed a climb RA from its TCAS. The ATCO was
a questionnaire after each run. The questionnaires asked the
notified of the TCAS situation via RA downlink
participants to rate their perceived workload, Situational
messages.
Awareness (SA), safety, and operational acceptability of the
• About five seconds later, a "clear of conflict" message
procedures used in the specific scenario. The questionnaires
appeared on CPDS. KLM121 was now 900 ft above the
differed between the RPAS pilot and the ATCOs.
RPAS, which had turned 40 degrees left. The intruder
passed behind the RPAS.
I. Baseline Scenarios
• The RPAS pilot halted the left turn, informed ATC of
Participants performed baseline scenario before each set
the conflict resolution, and requested a 'direct' to the next
of en-route TMA scenarios. These baseline scenarios served
waypoint, which was approved. The scenario proceeded
as a comparative standard for assessing the human factors
without further incidents.
aspects of the conflict scenarios. These baseline scenarios
included typical background traffic levels and procedures
and a flight plan to be followed by the UAS, but no planned
conflicts.
J. Simulation Simplifications
Due to the lack of a realistic RPAS taxi model in the
MUST simulator, the RPAS was spawned directly at the
threshold of the active runway prior to take-off. Following
landing, the RPAS was steered off the runway onto the grass,
and subsequently removed from the simulation. Because of
this simplification, this study does not consider RPAS
ground operations.
Fig. 7: Actual route flown by the RPAS and the conflict causing intruder in
the head-on conflict in en-route airspace scenario
IV. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This section presents the results of the four most
interesting scenarios that lead to the main conclusions of this
study. Note that the baseline scenarios, which considered
nominal operations in en-route and TMA settings without

--- Page 8 ---

to assign a distinct color to RWC warning alerts. Moreover,
CA takes precedence over RWC, and persisting with an
RWC resolution during a CA scenario might impair the
effectiveness of the commanded CA maneuver. As such,
pilot training should emphasize halting RWC maneuvers and
following CA system guidance when a RWC alert escalates
into a CA alert. Furthermore, due to their current training,
ATCOs are less accustomed to horizontal RWC resolutions.
Consequently, they should be trained to anticipate both
horizontal and vertical conflict resolutions from RWC-
equipped aircraft. In this regard, the introduction of RWC
alert downlink, similar to TCAS RA downlink, could
enhance ATCO's situational awareness of potential
horizontal conflict resolutions. However, since RWC alerts
are computed at RPAS ground stations, implementing RWC
downlink might pose technical challenges.
B. Aerial Work Parallel to an Airway
1) Conflict Description
In this scenario, the RPAS conducted a planned area
survey near an airway, operating in an ATC-assigned
airspace volume between FL210 and FL230; see Fig. 10.
Fig. 8: CPDS screenshot of the initial corrective alert caused by KLM121 Despite the 5 NM separation from the airway, the DAA
blunder
system was expected to trigger DWC alerts due to its conflict
detection based on current aircraft states. This is because the
2) Questionnaire Results
DAA system does not know the routes of any aircraft,
Questionnaire results for this scenario are shown in Fig.
including the route of the UAS itself. The goal of this
9. Because the en-route ATCO was surprised by the conflict,
scneario was to observe remote pilot responses to such
he rated his SA and workload lower than the baseline run.
nuisance alerts. The conflict unfolded as follows:
Furthermore, he was surprised that the UA made a horizontal
maneuver, expecting instead a vertical maneuver following • A CPD conflict probe for one airliner (NOZ1495) on the
the RA. The horizontal avoidance maneuver by the RPAS airway appeared during the RPAS’s second eastbound
took it 3 miles off course, which had the potential to cause leg.
conflicts with other aircraft, which would require additional • The DAA system issued a DWC corrective alert for
controller intervention. The RPAS rated workload and SA
NOZ1495; see Fig. 11.
on par with the baseline scenario but viewed safety and
• The en-route ATCO warned the RPAS of a potential
operational acceptability as inferior. This could be due to the
conflict with NOZ1495, in case of an accidental exit
fact that there was only 18 seconds left before CPA, despite
from its assigned airspace.
the perceived clarity of the traffic display guidance for
• The remote pilot, predicting the next pre-programmed
maneuver selection. Post-scenario, the pilot revealed
unawareness of the "monitor vertical speed" preventive RA, turn would prevent DWC loss, refrained from action.
having misinterpreted the red traffic symbol as a warning- • About 20 seconds later, the RPAS performed its next
level DWC alert, and questioned if a DWC maneuver should planned turn and the corrective alert resolved itself.
halt upon RA issuance.
En-Route ATCO RPAS Pilot
Fig. 9: Questionnaire results for the head-on conflict in en-route airspace
scenario
3) Analysis
Both RWC warning alerts and TCAS RAs are displayed
in red, although they use different shapes—a circle for
warning alerts and a square for TCAS RAs. This similarity
can lead to confusion for pilots, especially when a RWC
Fig. 10: Route flown by the RPAS in the aerial work parallel to an airway
warning alert evolves into a TCAS RA. Given the scenario
established association of TCAS RAs with red, it's advisable

--- Page 9 ---

C. C2 Lost Link in TMA Airspace
1) Conflict Description
In this scenario, the RPAS experienced C2 link loss after
take-off. Consequently, the RPAS pilot has no active control
of the RPAS. This limits the RPAS’s conflict response to
automated TCAS RAs. The C2 link loss also necessitates
backup telephone use for communication with ATC. The
sequence of events was as follows:
• During its departure climb, the RPAS experienced a loss
of C2 link.
• The RPAS initiated its lost C2 link procedure: it
automatically changed its transponder code to 7400,
turned SE and flew a predefined horizontal route to the
ROT waypoint at the last cleared altitude of 3,000 ft.
• About 20 seconds after the loss of C2 link, the RPAS
pilot contacted the Approach ATCO via the backup
telephone. The lost link procedure was verified with the
approach controller.
• En-route to the ROT loiter waypoint, the RPAS
experienced a conflict with a B737, callsign TRA5243,
on departure from Rotterdam; see Fig. 13.
Fig. 11: CPDS screenshot of the corrective alert caused by NOZ1495. The • The conflict triggered a TCAS TA. A few moments later,
yellow conflict probe areas, which indicates the region of airspace where it escalated to a TCAS RA.
the RPAS would loss DWC, can be seen.
• The pilot of TRA5243 did not respond to the RA, as
2) Questionnaire Results instructed for this scenario.
The questionnaire results for this scenario are given in • The RPAS automatically followed the “descend” RA
Fig. 12. The RPAS Pilot found the conflict probes beneficial issued by its onboard TCAS; see Fig.14.
for SA, yet rated operational acceptability below the baseline • When TCAS declared “clear of conflict”, the UA
due to ambiguity regarding the necessity of reporting false returned automatically to its pre-conflict altitude of 3,000
alerts to ATC. Despite the uneventful scenario for the ACC ft and continued to fly its pre-planned route to ROT.
ATCO, he rated his SA lower than the baseline, possibly due • At ROT, the RPAS initiated its loiter. After 2 loiter
to unfamiliarity with RPAS aerial work missions and the orbits, the C2 link was restored.
uncertainty surrounding whether the RPAS might • The RPAS pilot established radio communications with
inadvertently exit its aerial work zone. Approach ATCO and hung up the backup telephone.
Fig. 13: Conflict between the RPAS and TRA5243 during C2 lost link
2) Questionnaire Results
En-Route ATCO RPAS Pilot
Fig. 12: Questionnaire results for the aerial work parallel to an airway The questionnaire results for this scenario are given in Fig.
scenario 15. The conflict between TRA5243 and the RPAS could be
clearly seen on the Approach ATCO’s HMI. The TCAS RA
3) Analysis
downlink added to NARSIM for this experiment helped the
The scenario demonstrated that CPDS's conflict probe
ATCO to see that the RPAS was following its RA, which
functionality is valuable in identifying false conflicts during
the ATCO found very useful. Communications with the
pre-planned aerial-work missions. The ability to estimate the
backup telephone went well, but it was not clear to the
distance to loss of DWC is particularly beneficial, aiding in
ATCO when exactly R/T communications were restored.
the decision-making process about whether a pre-planned
The remote pilot rated situational awareness and safety only
route turn would resolve a conflict without additional action.
slightly lower than for the baseline TMA scenario. This is
Displaying the RPAS’s route on the DAA display would
partly because he was unaware of the conflict and RA, and
further help with this. Additionally, subdividing pre-planned
would have preferred to have been informed of it by ATC
aerial work areas into smaller sections can streamline
on the backup telephone, in case the C2 link had been
operations. By blocking only the RPAS's current section and
restored during or immediately after the RA maneuver. He
allowing entry to subsequent sections after ATC clearance,
was unsure when to hang up the backup telephone after the
it reduces the likelihood of the RPAS inadvertently exiting
C2 link was restored, and would have preferred some
its work zone and may enhance airspace capacity, as each
coordination procedures.
individual section would be smaller than the total area.

--- Page 10 ---

D. Ad hoc Aerial Work in TMA Airspace
1) Conflict Description
In this scenario, the RPAS conducts aerial work in
uncontrolled airspace and encounters conflicts with two
non-cooperative VFR aircraft, only detectable by the DAA
system's ATAR. The VFR aircraft fly unpredictably at the
UA's altitude within the aerial work volume. Although
unrealistic, this scenario is designed to stress-test the DAA
system's non-cooperative capabilities in a dynamic
environment. The RPAS's planned route is similar to the
area surveillance mission in en-route airspace, but at 2,000ft
over Rotterdam port area. As shown in Fig. 16, the RPAS
frequently deviates from its course to avoid the VFR
intruders. The conflicts have the following characteristics:
• The non-cooperative intruders were displayed on CPDS
as radar tracks with an ATAR-assigned ID. DWC
corrective and warning alerts were issued.
• In some cases, the RPAS lost DWC because the intruders
were continuously maneuvering during the encounter.
• Not all conflicts resulted in DAA alerts. In some cases,
the RPAS pilot maneuvered before an alert as the RPAS
was in Class G uncontrolled airspace .
Fig. 14: The RPAS automatically follows the TCAS Descend RA during
• The RPAS pilot primarily used ROW rules when
the conflict in the C2 lost link in TMA airspace scenario
resolving the conflicts, however, the intruder frequently
broke the same rules.
Fig. 16: Actual route flown by the RPAS as a results of conflicts with non-
cooperative traffic during the ad hoc aerial work scenario
Approach ATCO RPAS Pilot
Fig. 15: Questionnaire results for the C2 lost link in TMA airspace scenario 2) Questionnaire Results
3) Analysis This scenario proved high-workload for the RPAS pilot,
who rated all criteria below the baseline TMA scenario (not
After the C2 link is reestablished, the RPAS pilot needs
shown). The CPDS display aided conflict visualization and
to first coordinate with ATC, signaling that they will be
resolution selection, but the limited field of regard of the
transitioning back to radio communications. Only after this
ATAR caused some late-noticed conflicts, especially when
step should the backup telephone be disconnected.
conflicts were caused by intruder from behind. In most
Incorporating this minor improvement into the C2 lost link
cases, Right of Way (ROW) rules resolved conflicts. When
and radio failure procedures could help to reduce confusion
intruders did not follow ROW rules, a different maneuver
in these situations. If ATC is equipped with TCAS RA
was needed. In one case, a warning alert was issued for a
downlink, it's beneficial for the ATCO to inform the RPAS
intruder descending behind the UA. While maintaining
pilot about the conflict and any associated RA during lost
heading and speed was the correct and ROW-compliant
link situations. This becomes especially important if the C2
resolution, the accompanying aural alert was "traffic,
link is reestablished during the RA maneuver, as the pilot
maneuver now," contradicted the expected resolution.
may need to resume control of the RPAS. Post auto-TCAS
RA, the RPAS altitude could either revert to the pre-conflict 3) Analysis
altitude or stay at the post-conflict altitude. The former This run showed that DAA is particularly useful in
could reintroduce conflict but is predictable for ATC; the uncontrolled airspace and for conflicts with non-cooperative
latter could lead to the RPAS descending outside ATC intruders. Given that the ATAR primarily faces forward,
airspace or occupying multiple flight levels. Given the pilots must be extra vigilant of potential threats from behind,
predictability for ATC, the experiment participants favored which can lead to last-minute alerts. Standard right of way
the RPAS returning to the pre-conflict altitude. As such, (ROW) rules may prove ineffective if intruders intentionally
returning to the pre-conflict altitude should become standard disregard them, as observed in this scenario. It is therefore
for RPAS lost link logic. crucial to train pilots to thoroughly understand DAA display
cues, evaluating the appropriateness of ROW adherence on
a case-by-case basis. The DWC aural alerts for corrective

--- Page 11 ---

and warning alerts urge the RPAS pilot to start a resolution • Non-cooperative intruders can trigger sudden alerts when
maneuver. However, this scenario identified an edge case they approach from areas outside the air-to-air radar's
where the ‘Maneuver, Maneuver Now’ aural alert for field of view. If such intruders are already on a path that
warning alerts do not make sense for intruders that are still will diverge from the RPAS, any warning aural alerts
within the DMOD, but flying away from the RPAS. may be deemed unnecessary and a nuisance.
Suppressing such nuisance aural alerts would be better for • During aerial work, adding the RPAS’s route to the DAA
RPAS pilot workload. display will enable the RPAS pilot to identify nuisance
alerts that will self-resolve with the next planned turn(s).
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK The next series of experiments will further investigate
procedures for DAA-equipped RPAS operations in
This paper is part of a multi-year study aiming to
European airspace. Focus areas include comparing US and
develop procedures for integrating Medium Altitude Long
European DAA standards, managing multiple RPAS in the
Endurance (MALE) Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
same airspace, and studying the impact of C2 link latency
(RPAS) into European airspace using Real-Time Simulation
on DWC alerting, guidance, and ATC communications.
(RTS) experiments. The present paper focused on assessing
operational procedures for Detect and Avoid (DAA), ACKNOWLEDGMENT
including Remain Well Clear (RWC) and Collision
The authors would like to thank all the pilots and air
Avoidance (CA) safety layers. NLR conducted an RTS
traffic controllers that participated in the experiment and
experiment involving experienced Air Traffic Controllers
provided valuable feedback based on decades of experience.
(ATCOs), RPAS and airline pilots. The experiment
considered conflict scenarios in both controlled and REFERENCES
uncontrolled airspace, within the en-route and Terminal
[1] ICAO, "Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS) Concept of
Maneuvering Area (TMA) regions around Rotterdam
Operations (CONOPS) for International IFR Operations,", 2017.
airport. We utilized the GA-ASI Conflict Prediction and
[2] EDA, "Accomodation of Military IFR MALE RPAS under GAT
Display System (CPDS), a RTCA DO-365B compliant Airspace Classes A-C," EDA, 2019.
DAA display system, and TCAS II v7.1 implementation for
[3] M. Perez-Batle, E. Pastor, X. Prats, P. Royo and R. Cuadrado,
CA. The following main conclusions can be drawn: "Maintaining separation between airliners and RPAS in non-
segregated airspace," in FAA/Eurocontrol ATM R&D Seminar, 2013.
• CA supersedes RWC. Hence, any ongoing maneuver
addressing a prior RWC alert should be halted if a CA [4] D. Geister, G. Schwoch, R. Geister and B. Korn, "Integrating RPAS -
Published Approach Procedures vs. Local Arrangements," in
alert arises. Continuing an RWC resolution during a CA
Integrated Communications Navigations and Surveillance
situation could potentially diminish or nullify the impact
Conference, 2017.
of the ordered CA Resolution Advisory (RA).
[5] J. Teutsch and C. Petersen, "Communication Latency and Loss for
• Auto execution of TCAS RAs during lost link conditions Integrated IFR-RPAS Movements in the TMA," in Integrated
significantly improves safety. An RPAS should return to Communication, Navigation and Surveillance Conference, 2022.
its last cleared altitude after an auto-RA, whether the [6] A. Manzo, G. Riccardi, G. D'Angelo, G. Pompei, D. Taurino, A.
RPAS was previously at that altitude or was Ghita, U. Ciniglio and S. Cusimano, "Sesar PJ13 Erica "Enable RPAS
climbing/descending towards it. This is because returning Insertion in Controlled Airspace"- Validation experiment for the long-
term integration of RPAS in an Italian TMA air traffic scenario," in
to the last cleared altitude is more predictable to ATC.
12th EASN International Conference on Innovation in Aviation and
• When a RPAS encounters a conflict during a C2 link
Space for opening New Horizons, 2023.
loss, it is beneficial for ATC to relay the conflict and RA
[7] E. Pastor, N. Peinecke, E. Theunissen, F. Corraro, C. Shaw, D.
information to the RPAS pilot, provided they have RA
Taurino and P. Hagstrom, "URClearED – Defining the Remain Well
downlink. This action is crucial in case the C2 link re- Clear concept for airspace D-G classes in the European airspace," in
establishes during the RA, enabling the pilot to reassume AIAA Aviation Forum, 2021.
control after the aircraft finishes its automated RA [8] J.R. Comstock, Jr., R.W. Ghatas, M.C. Consiglio, J.P. Chamberlain,
maneuver. K.D. Hoffler, “UAS air traffic controller acceptability study 2:
• Right of way rules can be ineffective for resolving
evaluating detect and avoid technology and communication delays in
s imulation,” NASA/TM–2015-218989, 2015.
conflicts when an intruder intentionally breaches them.
[9] N. M. Paczam, J. Cooper and E. Zakrzewski, "Integrating Unmanned
Hence, it's advantageous to train pilots to utilize the
Aircraft into NEXTGEN Automation Sytems," in Digital Avionics
information from DAA displays, like CPDS, to assess
Systems Conference (DASC), 2012.
whether following right of way rules is the optimal
[10] K. Swieringa, R. Young, R. Vinona and M. Hague, "UAS Concept of
solution for resolving conflicts on a case-by-case basis.
Operations and Vehicle Technologies Demostration," in Integrated
• In terminal areas, when a warning alert is generated, the Cmmunications Navigation and Surveillance Conference, 2019.
RPAS pilot should not instantly initiate a missed [11] RTCA Special Committee 228, "DO-365 B Minimum Operational
approach if the intruding aircraft is typically required to Performance Standards (MOPS) for Detect and Avoid (DAA)
give way. The conflict might resolve without the need for Systems," RTCA, Washington D.C., 2021.
RPAS action, or a safer alternative such as a horizontal [12] Eurocontrol, “Airborne Collision Avoidance Guide”, 2017
turn could be applied. [13] T. Langejan, E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek and J. Hoekstra, "Effect of ADS-B
• While operating in Class G airspace or where there may Characteristics on Airborne Conflict Detection and Resolution," in
be non-cooperative traffic, it's advisable to follow SESAR Innovation Days, 2016.
procedures that account for a VFR pilot's restricted field [14] RTCA Special Committee 228, "RTCA DO-366 Minimum
Operational Performance Specifications (MOPS) air Air-to-Air Radar
of view, such as clearing turns prior to
for Traffic Surveillance," RTCA, Washinton D.C., 2017.
climbing/descending.
View publication stats