

--- Page 1 ---

MALE RPAS INTEGRATION INTO EUROPEAN AIRSPACE
Part 2: Real-Time Simulation Analysis of Operations with Remain Well Clear
Emmanuel Sunil†, Erik Theunissen§, Timothy Bleakley‡, Erik-Jan Hartlieb†, Paul Kuiper†,
Marieke Suijkerbuijk†, Tim Dufourmont† and Timothy Grebe‡
†Royal Netherlands Aerospace Centre (NLR), Amsterdam, The Netherlands
§Information Systems Delft (ISD), Leiderdorp, The Netherlands
‡General Atomics Aeronautical Systems Inc. (GA-ASI), San Diego, United States of America
Abstract determine if the ATCO is already aware of, and is in the
process of resolving a conflict, before reporting it. At the
At present, Medium Altitude Long Endurance
same time, the procedures should provide RPAS pilots with
(MALE) Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) are
more flexibility than described in the current standards to
only permitted to fly in segregated airspace in Europe.
resolve conflicts. In TMAs, this approach is likely to reduce
Because such restrictions limit the efficiency of MALE
the number of unnecessary go-arounds needed to resolve
RPAS operations, several European projects are working on
conflicts during final approach when DTA alerts are issued.
the procedures needed to allow routine MALE RPAS flights
in unsegregated European airspace. To contribute to these 1 Introduction
efforts, the Royal Netherlands Aerospace Center (NLR) has
In addition to supporting defense operations, Medium
partnered with General Atomics Aeronautical Systems Inc.
Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) Remotely Piloted
(GA-ASI) and Information System Delft (ISD) to gather the
Aircraft Systems (RPAS) have numerous civilian
data needed to develop MALE RPAS airspace integration
applications ranging from infrastructure inspection to
procedures through a series of Real-Time Simulation (RTS)
search and rescue. However, the current regulatory
experiments. This paper summarizes the results of the
environment in Europe inhibits such applications as they
second RTS campaign performed in November 2020 under
only permit MALE RPAS operations in segregated
this collaboration, which focused on the procedures needed
airspace, i.e., “airspace of specified dimensions allocated
for the Remain Well Clear (RWC) component of Detect and
for exclusive use to a specific user” [1]. Furthermore, each
Avoid (DAA). RWC systems provide RPAS pilots with
MALE RPAS flight requires numerous permissions from
cues that reduce the chance of a Collision Avoidance (CA)
national aviation authorities, and this process can be very
situation from occurring. In this work, the GA-ASI Conflict
time consuming. As a result of these restrictions, the
Prediction and Display System (CPDS), a DAA alerting,
frequency and the operational efficiency of MALE RPAS
guidance and display system that meets the requirements set
flights in Europe are presently limited.
in RTCA DO-365B, was used. In addition to an active
Royal Netherlands Airforce RPAS pilot, the RTS also Recognizing the need for a common European
involved a number of experienced Air Traffic Controllers approach to address this challenge, several SESAR and
(ATCOs) and airline pilots. The experiment considered EDA projects are currently working towards a
several challenging RWC scenarios in both controlled and comprehensive set of procedures, more formally known as
uncontrolled airspace classes, in both en-route and Terminal a Concept of Operations (CONOPS), to enable MALE
Maneuvering Area (TMA) settings. This included RWC RPAS operations in unsegregated European airspace [2] [3]
encounters during the final approach phase to analyze the [4] [5] [6] [7]. Similar studies have also been performed in
procedures needed for the new DAA Terminal Alerting the United States [8] [9] [10]. In general, these studies focus
(DTA) logic described in RTCA DO-365B. The results on ensuring that the main difference between RPAS and
indicated that both ATCOs and RPAS pilots can become conventional aircraft - the fact that the RPAS pilot is
accustomed to operations with RWC/DAA with relatively physically separated from his/her aircraft - does not
little additional training. The results also suggest that RPAS adversely affect existing airspace users. Moreover for
pilots should avoid excessive RWC-related radio Europe, SESAR advocates for a phased approach to MALE
communications as this could have a negative effect on RPAS integration, with an “accommodation” phase in the
ATCO workload. To this end, RPAS pilots are short-term (by 2025) with minimal changes to existing ATC
recommended to integrate the information provided on the systems, and a “full integration” phase in the longer-term
DAA display with information in radio communications to

--- Page 2 ---

(by 2030) that will require the introduction of new RTCA DO-365B. As such, the participants were instructed
technologies such as Detect and Avoid (DAA). to use the RWC procedures described in RTCA DO-365B
in order to evaluate and recommend improvements to these
To complement the aforementioned initiatives for
procedures, particularly when considering operations in
integrating MALE RPAS into European airspace, the Royal
European airspace. The RTS also considered scenarios with
Netherlands Aerospace Center (NLR) has partnered with
Command and Control (C2) lost link and Radio Telephony
General Atomics Aeronautical Systems Inc. (GA-ASI) and
(R/T) failure in order to validate the procedures developed
Information Systems Delft (ISD). The main objective of this
for these contingencies during the first study in 2019 [12] .
collaboration is to gather the empirical data needed for
developing a MALE RPAS airspace integration CONOPS This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides
through a series of Real-Time Simulation (RTS) the reader with background information about RWC. The
experiments. The aim is to take into account both nominal design of the experiment is described in Section 3. The
and off-nominal scenarios, as well as operations in airspaces results of the five most interesting experiment scenarios are
classes A-G, i.e., for operations in both controlled and presented and analyzed in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes
uncontrolled airspace classes. It is expected that the results the main conclusions of the present study, and describes
of these RTS experiments can be used as an additional topics that are planned for future research.
source of data to aid policy makers, regulators and
stakeholders, such as Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) and
2 Background
(RPAS) pilots, with their decision-making process in order
to accelerate the integration of MALE RPAS into European
2.1 Layers of Safety in ATM
airspace.
In contemporary Air Traffic Management (ATM),
This paper presents the design and results of the
there are four concentric layers of safety that aim to prevent
second RTS campaign performed under this collaboration
mid-air collisions; see Figure 1. The outer-most safety layer
in November 2020. The main goal of this RTS was to
aims to avoid conflicts on a strategic timescale, i.e., before
consider the procedures needed to operate with the Remain
take-off. Airspace design is an example of this layer.
Well Clear (RWC) component of Detect and Avoid (DAA)
However, not all conflicts can be solved on a strategic
systems. RWC is the one of the two main functions of DAA.
timescale because uncertainties can cause variations
It aims to provide RPAS pilots with the alerts and guidance
between the planned and the actual routes flown by aircraft,
needed to maintain a safe distance from other traffic, and
e.g., diversions due to weather. The second layer of safety,
thereby decrease the need for Collision Avoidance (CA, the
known as separation provision service, aims to deal with
second function of DAA) maneuvers as much as possible.
such uncertainties. This service is primarily performed by
As such, RWC is often considered to be the unmanned
ATCOs in controlled airspace and they are supported by
equivalent of present day ‘see-and-avoid’ rule. But in
radar, active surveillance and automation to provide this
contrast to see-and-avoid, for which the definition of ‘well
service.
clear’ is subjective, RWC systems make use of quantitative
data from cooperative (e.g., ADS-B) and non-cooperative
sensors (e.g., air-to-air radar), as well as a mathematically
well-defined criteria for determining conflicts.
For the purposes of this study, the GA-ASI Conflict
Prediction and Display System (CPDS) was integrated into
NLR simulators, to provide RPAS pilots with RWC cues
during the RTS. CPDS was designed to meet the latest
RTCA standards for DAA equipment, namely RTCA DO-
365B [11]. In addition to an active Royal Netherlands
Airforce RPAS pilot, the RTS also involved a number of
experienced Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) and airline
pilots. The experiment considered several challenging RWC Figure 1: Layers of safety in ATM
encounters in both controlled and uncontrolled airspace
The third safety layer, known as self-separation,
classes, in both en-route and Terminal Maneuvering Area
requires pilots to visually steer their aircraft away from
(TMA) settings. This included RWC encounters during the
neighboring traffic using a technique known as “see-and-
final approach phase to analyze the procedures needed for
avoid”. Although self-separation layer is applicable for all
the new DAA Terminal Alerting (DTA) logic described in
airspace classes, in practice it is primarily used in

--- Page 3 ---

uncontrolled airspace classes. The fourth and final layer of Corrective Alert approximately 75 seconds before a
safety focuses on last-resort Collision Avoidance (CA). The predicted loss of DWC would occur. If the time until a
Traffic Alert and Collision and Avoidance System II (TCAS predicted loss of DWC decreases below approximately 25
II) is an example of a CA system. This onboard system seconds, the Warning Alert is declared.
interrogates the transponders of aircraft in the airspace
To provide the pilot with guidance to avoid a loss of
around an aircraft, to identify potential collisions, and
DWC, the directions in which a DAA alert is predicted to
provides pilots with traffic alerts, and in closer range,
occur are indicated, color-coded yellow for a Corrective
(coordinated) conflict resolution advisories to avoid mid-air
Alert and red for a Warning Alert.
collisions.
As a result of these four safety layers, mid-air 2.3 RTCA Procedures for Remain Well Clear
collisions are, thankfully, extremely rare events in today’s Alerts
ATM system. To ensure that RPAS operate in unsegregated
In the Operational Services and Environment
airspace with same level of safety as manned traffic, RPAS
Description (OSED) of [13]. the pilot action after a
must also be able to comply with all four layers of safety.
Corrective Alert is described as follows: ‘The pilot uses
Although MALE RPAS may carry the same
training, judgment, and display of traffic to assess the threat
Communications, Navigation and airspace Surveillance
and the need to maneuver. If the PIC can’t maneuver in
(CNS) equipment as their manned counterparts, there is one
response to ATC Traffic Advisory, the PIC will inform
critical difference: the pilot is not on-board. Consequently,
ATC’.
the pilot cannot ‘see and avoid’ other aircraft by looking out
of the flight deck. Instead, he/she needs a technological In [13]. the associated pilot action is specified as: ‘The
means to perform both the self-separation and CA tasks. DAA warning alert is intended to inform the PIC that
The technological means to perform both these functions immediate action is required to maintain DWC. The
are often referred to as Detect and Avoid (DAA). warning alert necessitates immediate awareness of the PIC
and a prompt ownship maneuver’.
It should be noted that the self-separation layer of
DAA is called Remain Well Clear (RWC). This paper
2.4 Conflict Prediction and Display System
focuses on the procedures needed for RWC.
(CPDS)
2.2 RTCA Remain Well Clear Definition and CPDS is a modular system comprised of separate
Alerting components for data parsing and processing, alerting and
guidance computations, and display. The components are
In May 2017 RTCA published DO-365, the Minimum
integrated using industry-standard Data Distribution
Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) for UAS
Service (DDS) Middleware. The first version of the GA-
Detect and Avoid Systems [13]. Four months later the
ASI Conflict Prediction and Display System (CPDS) was
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) published
realized in June 2011 [13]. After the quantification of the
Technical Standard Order (TSO) C-211 for Detect and
DWC volume by SC-228 in 2014, this was used as the basis
Avoid (DAA) Systems [14] referencing [13]. for the
for the specification and configuration of the alerting and
required minimum performance standards. An important
guidance function in CPDS.
milestone achieved with the DAA MOPS was the
quantitative definition of DAA Well Clear (DWC), a CPDS complies with the requirements for DAA
temporal and spatial boundary around the aircraft intended alerting and guidance data presentation specified in DO-
to be an electronic means of avoiding conflicting traffic. 365. Yellow heading bands on the DAA traffic display
The definition of a horizontal DWC boundary comprises indicate the directions in which the loss of DWC is predicted
both a spatial and a temporal threshold that are combined in to occur within the Corrective Alert time and red heading
the so-called modified tau equation. The spatial threshold in bands mark the directions in which a Warning Alert is
this equation is referred to by DMOD, which for the en- predicted.
route phase is set to 4000 ft and for the DAA Terminal Area
(DTA) to 1500 ft. Outside the DTA, the temporal
component of the modified tau equation is equal to 35
seconds. For DTA traffic, tau is set to 0.
Both DAA alerting and guidance requirements are
specified in relation to a prediction of losing DWC. In a non-
maneuvering encounter, the pilot will be provided with a

--- Page 4 ---

a) The NARSIM Radar simulator
b) The NARSIM Tower simulator with Rotterdam airport
scenery
Figure 3: The NLR ATC Research Simulator
(NARSIM)
Figure 2. Example GA-ASI CPDS display during an RA Two components of NARSIM were used in this study,
namely NARSIM Radar for Approach (APP) and Area
CPDS goes beyond the minimum requirements with
Control Center (ACC) simulation, and NARSIM Tower
the depiction of the conflict space on the Cockpit Display of
(TWR) for airport simulation; see Figure 3. During the
Traffic Information (CDTI) and the addition of a vertical
simulations, the built-in Radio Telephony (R/T) system was
profile display that depicts the vertical cross-section of the
used to emulate VHF voice communications between
conflict space.
ATCOs, pseudo pilots and the RPAS pilot. The system was
also used to emulate a fixed landline connection between
3 Experiment Design the ATCOs and the RPAS pilot as a backup communication
means during C2 Lost Link and R/T loss scenarios.
3.1 Apparatus
3.1.2 Multi UAS Supervision Testbed (MUST)
For this series of projects, NLR is using two of its
The Multi UAS Supervision Testbed, or MUST, was
simulators, namely the NLR ATM Research Simulator
developed by NLR as a reconfigurable generic RPAS
(NARSIM) and the Multi UAS Supervision Testbed
research simulation facility. MUST consists of two main
(MUST). The combination of these two simulators is
components: the RPAS flight dynamics simulator and the
referred as the MALE RPAS Real-time simulation Facility
RPAS Remote Pilot Station (RPS). The MUST RPS is
(MRRF).
shown in Figure 4. For the purposes of this study, the GA-
ASI CPDS has been integrated into the MUST simulator to
3.1.1 NLR ATM Research Simulator (NARSIM)
provide the RPAS pilot with RWC cues during the
NARSIM was developed to evaluate new ATC
experiment.
procedures, automation tools and ATCO Human-Machine
Interfaces (HMIs). To this end it simulates the most
important aspects of a real ATC system, including realistic
radar data and aircraft behavior. It also offers multiple
ATCO and pseudo-pilot working positions. NARSIM
development began in the late 1980s using commercial off-
the-shelf hardware. But because its software is written
entirely in-house at NLR, it can be easily adapted for a wide
variety of ATC research studies and ATCO training courses.

--- Page 5 ---

3.2 MALE RPAS and Related Assumptions
The GA-ASI MQ-9B SkyGuardian was used as the
MALE RPAS platform in this study. A 3-D model of this
aircraft was provided by GA-ASI and it was implemented
in the MRRF; see Figure 5. Additionally, the kinematics
model in the MUST simulator was adapted to match the
performance of the SkyGuardian; see Table 1.
Figure 5: The General Atomics SkyGuardian RPAS
Table 1: Characteristics of the GA-ASI SkyGuardian
Figure 4: The NLR Multi UAS Supervision Testbed
(MUST) Characteristic Value
Maximum Take-Off Weight 5,670 kg
MUST has two control modes: Autopilot (AP) and
Length 11.7 m
Flight Management System (FMS) modes. In AP mode,
RPAS heading, altitude, speed and vertical speed values can Wingspan 24 m
be adjusted and activated independently. Furthermore, AP Ceiling FL 400
mode allows pilots to initiate circular loiter patterns at the Cruise speed 122 kts
current position. In FMS mode, the RPAS autonomously
Max speed 210 kts
flies waypoints along a predefined route. The pilot can
select any waypoint in a route as the next active waypoint Additionally, the simulation and the CONOPS were
to fly directly to it. The pilot can provide control inputs via developed with the following MALE RPAS related
touchscreen / keyboard + mouse / Hands On Throttle and assumptions:
Stick (HOTAS).
• The RPAS has all the CNS equipment required for
In addition to the above control modes, MUST Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) flights.
simulates the basic functionality of an Automatic Take-Off
• The RPAS has a single C2 link. The C2 link transmits
and Landing System (ATLS) whereby take-off and landing
pilot commands from the RPS to the RPAS, and
can be initiated by the RPAS pilot at the press of a button
transmits telemetry data from the RPAS to the RPS.
on the autopilot HMI. A range-and-bearing tool is available
The C2 link is also used for voice communications
on the moving map display. This tool can be particularly
(R/T).
useful for the pilot during contingency situations when it is
necessary to deviate from the programmed route. • The RPAS has an Automatic Take-Off and Landing
System (ATLS). ATLS fully automates the take-off
To enable RWC simulation, Automatic Dependent
and landing phases of flight. The pilot can manually
Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) and air-to-air radar
abort ATLS actions if required.
models were developed for MRRF. ADS-B data was used
to track cooperative targets, and it was the primary source • The RPAS is flown with the pilot in the loop, except
of data for DAA in this study. The ADS-B sensor had a in the case of C2 lost link.
maximum reception range of 100 NM and an update rate of
• The RPAS automatically changes its transponder code
1 Hz. It was modelled as described in [12] and [14]. On the
to 7400 after a predefined time interval during C2 lost
other hand, non-cooperative targets were tracked using the
link.
air-to-air radar. The radar was modelled according to the
minimum specifications in [15] and had a max range of 6 • The RPS has primary and secondary backup voice
NM, an azimuth of ±110o, an elevation of ±15o and an communication systems that can be used to contact
update rate of 1 Hz.

--- Page 6 ---

ATC. during C2 lost link and R/T voice considered nominal RPAS operations in TMA and en-route
communications failures. airspaces, respectively, without conflicts or contingencies
and they were used as baseline scenarios for comparative
• The RPAS is single engined.
purposes. The remaining ten scenarios considered conflict
scenarios between the RPAS and background traffic.
3.3 Airport and Airspace
Additionally, three scenarios included RPAS contingencies
Rotterdam The Hague Airport (ICAO: EHRD) was after the conflicts were resolved. Each scenario had a total
used as the case-study airport in this study. EHRD is a busy duration of one hour. A full overview of the experiment
single runway civilian airport with a mix of both IFR and scenarios is available in Table 3.
VFR traffic. At EHRD, runway 24, with a length of 2,200
Table 3: List of experiment scenarios
meters was used for all simulation runs; see Figure 6.
Total No.
# Scenario Name Contingency Movements
1 Baseline TMA - 26
2 Baseline En-
- 27
Route*
3 Crossing
Encounter with
- 30
Unknown VFR
Figure 6: Layout of the Rotterdam airport traffic
[source: Google Maps] 4 En-route
C2 Lost Link 40
Encounters I*
To facilitate conflicts, the RPAS did not use standard Air
5 En-route Transponder
Traffic Services (ATS) routes. Instead, a different route was 45
Encounters II Failure
designed for the RPAS for each scenario.
6 Blunder by RPAS
All background VFR and IFR traffic, i.e., non-RPAS - 37
on Approach
traffic, used standard Air Traffic Services (ATS) routes as
7 Overtaking on
defined in the Netherlands Aviation Information
final by IFR - 23
Publication (AIP). To this end, all ATS routes within the
Traffic
following airspace regions were modelled for the
8 VFR Take-off
experiment. Table 2 lists the airspace regions considered. - 27
without clearance
Background traffic had different callsigns and routes in
9 Blunder by VFR
every scenario to avoid learning effects for the experiment
Traffic during - 27
participants.
final approach*
Table 2: Airspace regions modelled in the RTS
10 Blunder involving
Airspace two VFR traffic - 28
Airspace Name Altitudes
Type / Class on downwind*
Rotterdam Control CTR / GND – 11 Blunder by VFR
Traffic Region Class C 3000 ft Helicopter
R/T loss 29
Rotterdam Terminal TMA / 1500 ft – Crossing
Maneuvering Area 1 Class E 5500 ft Runway*
Schiphol Terminal TMA / 1500 ft –
12 Head-on
Maneuvering Area 1 Class A 9500 ft
encounter in TMA
Amsterdam Sector En-route/ 9500 ft – - 30
with unknown
South Class A 19500 ft
traffic*
Uncontrolled airspace Uncontrolled / GND –
outside Rotterdam CTR Class G 1500 ft It should be noted that the results section of this paper
focuses on the five most interesting scenarios that led to the
3.4 Experiment Scenarios
main conclusions of this study. These five scenarios are
A total of twelve scenarios were performed over a total marked with an asterisk (*) in Table 3.
of 3.5 days in November 2020. Of these, the first two runs

--- Page 7 ---

3.5 Experiment Participants part, all participants were provided with the RPAS route and
other basic details about the scenario. The second part of the
The main participants involved in the experiment are
pre-scenario briefing was provided only to the pilots. This
listed in Table 4. Note that the ACC ATCO only
included the exact details of the planned conflict between
participated in the en-route scenarios of the experiment (see
the RPAS and an intruder aircraft (call-signs, conflict times,
Table 3). It should be noted that the ATCOs and pseudo
intruder trajectories etc.). This part of the briefing also
pilots received monetary compensation for their time.
provided specific instructions to the pilots to increase the
Table 4: Main Experiment Participants likelihood of conflicts, including the ‘blunders’ they were
expected to make as part of each scenario. As such, the
# Role Notes
ATCOs did not have prior knowledge of the conflict(s) that
MALE RPAS Active RNLAF MQ9A pilot with
1 would take place in each run, in order to obtain a more
Pilot 7 years of flight experience
realistic response to each conflict.
2 TWR ATCO Retired with 30+ years of
Each scenario was followed by a debriefing session
experience
during which the experiment participants explained the
3 APP ATCO Retired with 35+ years of
timeline of events, and their decision-making process.
experience
These discussions led to specific recommendations towards
4 ACC ATCO Retired with 35+ years of
improving the procedures for operations with RWC and for
experience
the contingency situations considered; see section 4.
5 Pseudo Pilot Active 737 instructor, Ex F50
pilot 3.8 Questionnaires
6 Pseudo Pilot Active MD11F pilot
The ATCOs and the RPAS pilot were requested to fill
7 Pseudo Pilot Active A320 pilot
in a questionnaire after each run. The questionnaires asked
8 Pseudo Pilot Retired B777 pilot the participants to rate their perceived workload, Situational
Awareness (SA), safety, and realism. The questionnaires
3.6 Training
differed between the RPAS pilot and the ATCOs. The
Prior to the experiment, all experiment participants results of the questionnaires for each scenario are presented
were trained to use their respective part of the MRRF over in section 4.
a full day. The pseudo pilots and ATCOs that took part in
the experiment were already familiar with NARSIM as they 3.9 Simulation Simplifications
have all participated in previous NARSIM experiments.
Nonetheless, the pseudo pilots and ATCOs were given a 3.9.1 RPAS Ground Simulation
primer on the most important NARSIM functionalities, The MUST simulator does not have a realistic RPAS
including the new features that were introduced for this taxi model. Therefore for TMA scenarios, the RPAS was
experiment. Additionally, all experiment participants were spawned at the threshold of the active runway prior to take-
briefed on DAA and specifically on RWC, as well as on off. Similarly, after landing, the RPAS vacated the runway
their expected responses to different DAA alerts according by steering onto the grass next to the runway, and was then
to RTCA. deleted from the simulation. Because of this simplification,
this study does not consider RPAS ground operations.
The training for the RPAS pilot consisted of two main
parts: MUST familiarization and CPDS usage. A DAA
3.9.2 Weather
expert who led the development of CPDS provided the
All experiment runs were performed with ideal
RPAS pilot with a tutorial on how to use CPDS, including
weather conditions, namely daylight lighting, unlimited
the appropriate responses for the different RWC alerts as
visibility, calm winds (< 2kts and constant direction), and
specified in RTCA DO-365B; see section 2.3 for more
with a cloud ceiling of 3000 ft.
details. This training was performed using a number of
dedicated conflict scenarios that highlighted the features
and correct utilization CPDS. 4 Results and Analysis
This section presents the results of the five most
3.7 Experiment Procedure
interesting scenarios of the RTS that lead to the main
The experiment was performed over three full days in
conclusions of this study. Note that the baseline
November 2020. The participants were briefed prior to each
scenarios, which considered nominal operations in en-
scenario. This briefing consisted of two parts. In the first
route and TMA settings without conflicts, are not

--- Page 8 ---

described below. Nonetheless, the questionnaire warning alert. The RPAS pilot commented during the
results of the baseline scenarios are used in the debriefing that his pre-emptive action was aimed at
analysis that follows for comparative purposes. preventing an anticipated dangerous situation from
occurring in the future. It is assumed that RWC aural
4.1 En-Route Encounters I and C2 Lost Link alerts, which were not turned ON during this
experiment, will provide pilots with more clarity on
4.1.1 Summary of Events
when and when not to maneuver in response to alerts.
During this run, the RPAS flew a zig-zag route in
This will be analyzed in future experiments.
en-route airspace at FL115; see Figure 7.
Figure 7: Route flown by the RPAS during the ‘En-
Figure 8: CPDS screenshot of the encounter with
Route Encounters I + C2 Lost Link’ run
SWT7019
The route and altitude profile of the RPAS for
In the second part of this scenario, the RPAS
this run was designed in an effort to create conflicts
descended to the Rotterdam TMA with intentions to
with traffic on the Standard Arrival Routes (STARS)
land. However, during the approach, the RPAS
to Rotterdam and Schiphol airports. During the
experienced C2 lost link. Because C2 was not restored
simulation, the ACC ATCO noticed several conflicts
after a pre-determined time, the RPAS automatically
involving the RPAS and inbound aircraft. In all these
changed its squawk code to 7400 and flew to its
cases, the ATCO issued radar vectors to the intruders
predefined C2 lost link loiter waypoint, LTR, which is
(inbound traffic) to resolve these conflicts before the
located north of Rotterdam airport; see Figure 7.
conflict escalated to an RWC alert on CPDS. In many
Because the APP and TWR ATCOs did not know the
cases, the RPAS pilot reported the intruders he saw on
vertical profile of the RPAS during its flight to LTR,
CPDS to the ATCO even though no alerts were issued.
they delayed several outbounds out of concern that the
In one such encounter, the RPAS pilot steered his
RPAS could interfere with the Standard Instrument
aircraft without clearance to resolve a future conflict
Departure (SID) routes of RWY24 at Rotterdam.
with a descending aircraft before an RWC alert was
During this time, the RPAS pilot and the TMA ATCO
issued on CPDS; see Figure 8. Note here the red range
communicated with each other using the backup fixed
ring does not indicate an alert – only that an alert
line telephone since R/T is also unavailable during C2
would occur in the future if the RPAS maintained its
lost link. This helped the ATCO to understand the
track, speed and altitude, and if traffic situation
intentions of the RPAS. This interaction was
remained unchanged. Instead, RWC alerts are shown
performed in Dutch as both parties treated the
on CPDS by changing the shape and color of the
interaction as a regular phone call. After two orbits at
intruder aircraft’s symbol, and warning alerts the
LTR, C2 was restored as per the scenario scripting.
intruder’s symbol turns red. The ACC ATCO
The RPAS was cleared to land.
indicated during the post experiment briefing that he
was already aware of this intruder but did not consider
it to be a problem, so the maneuver by the RPAS pilot 4.1.2 Questionnaire Results
was found to be surprising and unnecessary. This was The questionnaire results for the experiment
indeed the case as the concerned intruder passed participants are given in Figure 9. Here, the blue line
behind the RPAS with sufficient vertical margin and indicates the results from the baseline run for
as such this encounter did not meet the criteria of a reference, while the orange lines are the results for this

--- Page 9 ---

run. As expected, all participants experienced a higher
workload and lower perceived safety than the baseline
case as a result of the conflicts and the C2 lost link
contingency that occurred in this scenario. Curiously,
the ACC ATCO indicated he had a higher situational
awareness during this run. He indicated during the
debriefing that this was because this scenario required
greater focus than the baseline simulation because of
the numerous conflicts that needed to be resolved.
d) RPAS Pilot
Figure 9: Questionnaire results for the ‘En-Route
Encounters I + C2 Lost Link’ run
4.1.3 Analysis
The following learning points were obtained from
this run:
• The RPAS pilot should not maneuver his/her
aircraft without clearance, especially for an
a) TWR ATCO intruder in airspace class A-C that has not yet
caused a DAA alert. Such maneuvers are
detrimental to ATCO SA, and could, therefore,
lead to less trust in the DAA system/procedures.
• RPAS pilots are recommended to integrate the
information provided on the DAA display with
information in radio communications to
determine if the ATCO is already aware of, and
is in the process of resolving a conflict, before
reporting it. This approach may reduce the
amount of DAA related R/T between the RPAS
b) APP ATCO
pilot and ATC, and could therefore be beneficial
for ATCO workload.
• In addition to pre-defining the horizontal route
towards contingency loiter waypoints in the
RPAS flight plan, it is also necessary to pre-
define the vertical profile towards such
waypoints in order to increase the predictability
for ATCOs during contingency situations such
as C2 lost link. Such waypoints should be
predefined for all phases of flight, and should be
c) ACC ATCO geographically separated from prevailing traffic
flows to avoid conflicts during loitering.
• During R/T failure the backup fixed line
telephone connection should be used to re-
establish communications with ATC. Standard

--- Page 10 ---

R/T phraseology in the English language should 4.2.2 Questionnaire Results
be used on the backup telephone. The questionnaire results for this run are shown
in Figure 12. Here it can be seen that the TWR ATCO
rated all metrics slightly higher than the baseline run.
4.2 Blunder by VFR Traffic During Final
As a result of the conflict resolution action taken by
Approach
the RPAS pilot, TWR did not consider the safety of
operations to be negatively affected. The APP ATCO
4.2.1 Summary of Events
rated both workload and SA at comparable levels to
In this scenario, a conflict occurred between a
the baseline scenario, while rating safety and realism
VFR helicopter and the RPAS as the RPAS is on final
to be better than the baseline. APP explained that the
approach. As the helicopter, callsign HELI,
ease with which the RPAS fit into a natural opening in
approached the field from the west, TWR instructed
the approach sequence increased safety as he did not
the helicopter to land behind the RPAS. However, the
have to issue commands to the aircraft next in the
helicopter misunderstood TWR instructions and
sequence to ensure sufficient spacing. Although the
turned to base directly in front of the RPAS on final.
conflict had a negative effect on the perceived safety
Because the conflict occurred during final, a DTA
level, the RPAS pilot considered the progression of the
warning alert was triggered on CPDS. On noticing the
conflict in this scenario to be highly realistic to what
alert, the RPAS pilot immediately executed and
he had personally experienced in real operations.
declared a missed approach as per the procedure
defined prior to the experiment for DTA warning
alerts. The flown route of the RPAS for this scenario
is displayed in Figure 10. Note that the simulation was
stopped after the initiation of the missed approach. The
CPDS screenshot of the conflict is shown in Figure 11.
a) TWR ATCO
Figure 10: Route flown by the RPAS during the
‘Blunder by VFR traffic during final approach’ run
b) APP ATCO
Figure 11: CPDS screenshot of the DTA warning alert
conflict with HELI during RPAS final approach

--- Page 11 ---

RPAS to land. The route flown by the RPAS can be
seen in Figure 13. The CPDS screenshot of the conflict
is displayed in Figure 14.
d) RPAS Pilot Figure 13: Route flown by the RPAS during the
Figure 12: Questionnaire results for the ‘Blunder by ‘Blunder involving two VFR traffic on downwind’ run
VFR traffic during final approach’ run
4.2.3 Analysis
The conflict considered in this scenario occurred
because the intruder blundered by turning to base too
early - a classic blunder in DAA literature that is often
used to explain the benefits of DAA. The RPAS pilot
resolved the conflict by initiating a missed approach as
required by the procedure described in RTCA DO-
365B [15]. Because the intruder was in front and
below the ownship, and because no other aircraft
obstructed the RPAS, the go around led to a swift
resolution of the conflict without negatively affecting
safety. Therefore, it can be concluded that the go-
around was the correct resolution for the conflict
geometry that occurred during this run.
Figure 14:CPDS screenshot of the DTA warning alert
conflict with PH-TIN during RPAS final approach
4.3 Blunder Involving Two VFR Traffic on
Downwind 4.3.2 Questionnaire Results
The questionnaire results for this run are shown
4.3.1 Summary of Events
in Figure 15. Because several go-arounds occurred
In this run, two VFR aircraft trailed the RPAS.
during this run (in addition to the one used to resolve
All three aircraft were on the same approach to the
the conflict experienced by the RPAS), and because
runway. When the RPAS turned to final, both VFRs
this increased the level of coordination required
blundered and turned base without clearance. This
between TWR and APP, TWR rated this run with a
caused the RPAS to become ‘sandwiched’ between the
higher level of workload than the baseline condition.
two VFRs causing a DTA warning alert conflict with
However, despite the increased number of missed
the VFR traffic in front of the RPAS. The RPAS pilot
approaches, APP perceived safety to be substantially
reacted by initiating a missed approach as
higher during this run than for the baseline condition.
recommended by DO-365 procedures. However,
As expected, the conflict between the RPAS and the
because the intruder was in front and above the RPAS,
VFR traffic during final decreased the perceived
the conflict actually became more serious during the
safety, and increased the workload felt by the RPAS
climb out - the time to Closest Point of Approach
pilot.
(CPA) decreased from 33 seconds to 12 seconds
during the climb out. Because of the busy traffic
situation, the APP controller instructed the RPAS to
loiter at its TMA contingency loiter waypoint before
an opening in the sequence made it possible for the

--- Page 12 ---

high vertical speed that resolved the conflict and
waiting for the RPAS to achieve the desired vertical
speed delayed the resolution of this conflict. The data
shown on CPDS confirms this - the time to CPA
decreased from 33 seconds when the warning was
declared to 12 seconds when the RPAS had achieved
sufficient vertical speed to clear the traffic. The pilot
indicated, given the geometry of this conflict, a right
turn would have resolved the conflict faster and
therefore would have been a safer maneuver than the
missed approach. This scenario suggests that missed
a) TWR ATCO approaches are not suitable for all conflict geometries
on final, especially for cases when the intruder is in
front and above the ownship.
4.4 Blunder by VFR Helicopter Crossing
Runway and R/T Failure
4.4.1 Summary of Events
During this scenario, the RPAS experienced a
conflict with a medivac helicopter during its initial
climb out from Rotterdam runway 24. The helicopter
was en route to Erasmus Medical Center, and was
instructed by the TWR ATCO to cross the field at the
b) APP ATCO
final end of runway 24, i.e., the landing side of the
runway, to prevent a conflict with the departing RPAS.
However, the helicopter pilot misunderstood TWR
instructions and crosses the field directly in front of
the RPAS, as the RPAS was climbing through 600ft.
Because of the sudden nature of the blunder made by
the helicopter pilot, the conflict had an initial TCPA of
only 11 seconds thereby triggering an immediate
warning alert on CPDS. The RPAS pilot steered his
aircraft 32 degrees to the left to resolve the conflict
based on the CPDS heading guidance bands to resolve
the conflict. Nonetheless, due to the last second
d) RPAS Pilot
blunder made by the helicopter the RPAS momentarily
Figure 15: Questionnaire results for the ‘Blunder
lost well clear during the resolution. After the conflict
involving two VFR traffic on downwind’ run
was resolved, the RPAS pilot notified TWR on the
resolution and requested clearance to resume the
4.3.3 Analysis
planned route of the RPAS.
As for the previous scenario, the RPAS pilot
followed the guidance in DO365B and executed a The CPDS screenshot of the initial conflict and
missed approach. However, during the debriefing of its resolution are displayed in Figure 16.
this run, the RPAS pilot suggested that a horizontal
maneuver would have been a better resolution option
in this scenario. This was because the RPAS was
sandwiched between two intruders on base that were
initially above the RPAS when the warning alert was
declared. Therefore, in addition to initiating a missed
approach, it was also necessary for the pilot to select a

--- Page 13 ---

DO-365B [11], the RPAS pilot decided that it would
be easier to resolve by steering 5 degrees to the left.
This resolved the conflict and the pilot decided to
continue the landing.
The route flown by the RPAS during this run is
shown in Figure 17.
a) Warning alert with tcpa of 11 seconds
Figure 17: Route flown by the RPAS during the
‘Blunder by VFR Helicopter crossing runway and R/T
failure’ run
4.4.2 Questionnaire Results
The questionnaire results for this run are
displayed in Figure 4.40.
b) Resolution 15 degrees to the left. Momentary loss of
well clear.
Figure 16: CPDS screenshots of the conflict with PH-
MEDI, a medivac helicopter en route to Erasmus
Medical Center
Once the RPAS was in approach airspace it
experienced a R/T failure. Because attempts to cycle a) TWR ATCO
the radios were not successful, the RPAS pilot
changed the squawk code to 7600 and called the APP
ATCO using the backup telephone. In contrast to the
en-route scenario described previously in section 4.1,
this time both the controller and the pilot used English
and regular R/T phraseology on the backup telephone.
APP provided the RPAS pilot with vectors to intercept
the RP24B approach to runway 24 at Rotterdam.
Because of the busy traffic situation, APP requested
the RPAS to hang up and call again when he neared
the IAF of RP24B. The RPAS pilot provided APP with
his phone number before hanging up. At the IAF, the b) APP ATCO
RPAS pilot called APP again using the backup
telephone. APP provided the RPAS clearance to start
the RP24B approach. During final, CPDS issued a
DTA warning alert with a VFR aircraft that had
crossed the field and was instructed by TWR to loiter
east of the field. Although the procedure for a DTA
warning alert is to perform a missed approach as per

--- Page 14 ---

immediate action taken by the pilot, were crucial to
preventing a potential mid-air collision.
In contrast to DO-365B procedures, the RPAS
pilot decided not to use a missed approach for the DTA
warning alert caused by a loitering aircraft on final.
Instead, the pilot resolved this conflict using a minor
horizontal maneuver, and then successfully landed the
RPAS. During the debriefing, the pilot stated that the
red heading band for this intruder only overlapped
with ownship track by two degrees, and therefore it
was far easier and safer to resolve by steering the
d) RPAS Pilot RPAS 5o to the left than executing a missed approach.
Figure 18: Questionnaire results for the ‘Blunder by
The TWR controller agreed with the RPAS pilot and
VFR Helicopter crossing runway and R/T failure’ run
added that a missed approach should only be used
Here, APP rated workload and SA similarly to when there is a serious safety risk as it has a large
the baseline condition. This suggests that the effect on ATCO workload. This scenario, therefore,
procedure for using the backup telephone during R/T provides additional evidence that it is not necessary to
failure does not have a negative impact on operations. resolve all warning alerts on final with missed
Despite initially not noticing the RPAS-helicopter approaches. In fact, in some cases, a missed approach
conflict, TWR considered his SA to be better than the can reduce safety (as was the case in the previous
baseline scenario. One potential explanation for this scenario; see section 4.3). It should be noted that
strange result is that TWR became more and more CPDS only issues red heading bands for the range of
used to expecting the unexpected as every experiment headings that lead to a warning alert. Although this is
scenario had either an RPAS related contingency or in contrast to the requirements in DO-365B which
conflict(s). During scenario debriefing, the TWR state that all headings should be blocked for DTA
ATCO was highly appreciative that the RWC alert warning alerts (to indicate that no horizontal maneuver
provided to the RPAS pilot that made it possible for may be used), this design choice made it possible for
the pilot to resolve a conflict that he noticed very late. the RPAS pilot avoid an unnecessary missed approach
As for most previous conflicts, the RPAS pilot rated using CPDS.
his workload to be higher, and his perceived safety
Several lessons can be learnt from the R/T
level to be lower, relative to the baseline situation. In
failure scenario that occurred in this run. Because of
spite of this, the RPAS pilot stated during the
the traffic situation, the APP ATCO disconnected the
debriefing that CPDS provided him with the
call. However, given that the R/T equipment has
information he needed to quickly resolve the conflict
already failed, it would be better to not disconnect the
with the helicopter by steering left - this explains the
back-up telephone connection as well (in case it is
higher pilot SA rating than for the baseline TMA
difficult to reestablish communications later). In the
simulation.
rare cases where it would be operationally necessary
to disconnect the back-up telephone connection, it is
4.4.3 Analysis
highly recommended to agree on a lost
A very serious last-second conflict occurred
communications procedure before disconnecting.
between the RPAS and the medivac helicopter at the
Furthermore, it recommended that the RPAS pilot
start of this run. Nonetheless, the RPAS pilot was able
should always initiate the voice communications via
to make a quick conflict resolution decision based on
the backup telephone since he/she is more likely to
the information provided in CPDS. As this conflict
notice the R/T failure before the ATCO, even this
occurred with an initial time to CPA of just 11
means that pilot will have to first speak to an ATC
seconds, it is understandable that the RPAS lost DWC
supervisor before being connected to the specific
during the resolution of this conflict even though the
ATCO in question. Finally, the RPAS pilot is
RPAS pilot steered an incredible 32° to the left. But,
encouraged to directly contact APP if R/T failure
because TWR did not notice this conflict, the alerts
occurs during take-off, and contact the next ATC
and guidance provided by CPDS, as well as the

--- Page 15 ---

center/sector in the path of the RPAS if R/T failure
occurs during the hand-off from one center to the next.
4.5 Head-on Conflict with Non-Cooperative
Traffic in Uncontrolled Airspace
4.5.1 Summary of Events
In this scenario, the RPAS track was head-on with a
non-cooperative aircraft in class G airspace at the same
altitude. Because the intruder was non-cooperative, it was
detected by the onboard air-to-air radar. When distance
between the two aircraft was less than 5.5 NM, a corrective
RWC alert was issued on CPDS. Because the conflict
occurred in uncontrolled airspace the RPAS pilot had to
resolve the conflict without ATC assistance. The RPAS
pilot observed the development of the conflict for about 30 Figure 20: CPDS screenshot of the conflict with a non-
seconds and then steered right to resolve. At that point, the cooperative intruder in class G uncontrolled airspace
conflict escalated to a warning alert. Therefore, the pilot
increased to the turn rate to increase the speed of resolution, 4.5.2 Questionnaire Results
leading to a 32o heading change. Because the intruder The questionnaire results for this scenario are
changed its track towards east, it fell outside the radar’s field shown in Figure 21. Here it can be seen that the TWR
of view. When the RPAS pilot returned to his route towards ATCO rated all metrics slightly higher in this scenario
the airport, the intruder re-appeared into the radar’s FOV. In than for the baseline run. Although APP rated
an attempt to keep the intruder in the radar’s FOV, the
workload, SA and realism to be the same as for the
RPAS flew a zig-zag pattern behind the intruder. Once the
baseline run, he rated safety to be lower in this run.
RPAS entered controlled airspace, the intruder flew away
This could be because many inbound aircraft had to be
from the RPAS track. The RPAS landed without further
put into holdings in this scenario. As for most previous
incident. Due to the amount of traffic in this run, APP had
conflict scenarios, the RPAS pilot considered his
to put several aircraft into holding. This was unrelated to the
RPAS conflict. The route flown by the RPAS in this run, workload and SA to be higher, while scoring safety
including the zig-zag track, can be seen in Figure 19. The lower than the baseline simulation.
CPDS screenshot of the conflict between the RPAS and the
non-cooperative intruder can be seen in Figure 20.
a) TWR ATCO
Figure 19: Route flown by the RPAS for the ‘Head-on
conflict with non-cooperative traffic in uncontrolled
airspace’ run

--- Page 16 ---

Time Simulation (RTS) experiments. The present
paper focused on analyzing the procedures needed for
the Remain Well Clear (RWC) component of Detect
and Avoid (DAA). To this end, NLR performed a
Real-Time Simulation (RTS) experiment involving
experienced Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs), RPAS
pilot, and airline pilots. The experiment considered
conflict scenarios in controlled and uncontrolled
airspace classes, in both en-route and Terminal
Maneuvering Area (TMA) settings. The experiment
made use of the GA-ASI Conflict Prediction and
b) APP ATCO Display System (CPDS), a RWC Human-Machine
Interface (HMI) that is compliant with the latest
RTCA technical standards for Detect and Avoid
(DAA) systems, namely RTCA DO-365B.
The results of the RTS led to following RPAS
integration procedures and human-factors related
conclusions that were not identified in prior fast-time
simulations:
• CPDS increased the Situational Awareness (SA)
of the RPAS pilot during nominal operations and
during conflicts. This was reflected in the
d) RPAS Pilot
questionnaire results of the RPAS pilot.
Figure 21: Questionnaire results for the ‘Head-on
conflict with non-cooperative traffic in uncontrolled • In many cases, ATCOs detected and resolved
airspace’ run
conflicts at the same time as when an alert was
4.5.3 Analysis declared on CPDS. This suggests that the alert
There are two main learning points from this run: timings used in CPDS match the internal conflict
definitions used by ATCOs.
• It is wise for pilots to observe conflicts for a few
moments before initiating a resolution. This will
• Excessive conflict reports by pilots can have a
make it possible to judge if an alert is a nuisance
negative effect on ATCO workload. To this end,
alert, especially after integrating the information in
the R/T with the information on the DAA display. RPAS pilots are recommended to integrate the
However, once an alert has been judged to be a information on the DAA display with
legitimate conflict, immediate action should be taken
communication exchanges on R/T to determine
to prevent the conflict situation from getting worse.
if ATC is already aware of, and is in the process
• Extra vigilance is required for radar-only intruders of resolving, a conflict before reporting it to
that cause conflicts because alerts are only provided
ATC. Furthermore, observing intruders causing
for such intruders if they remain within the air-to-air
alerts for a few moments can be used to filter out
radar’s field of view.
nuisance alerts that do not require further action
(e.g. momentary alerts caused by maneuvering
5 Conclusions and Future Work
traffic). These aspects should be included in the
This paper is part of an ongoing, multi-year study
training given to RPAS pilots to make
that aims to support the development of the procedures
needed for integrating Medium Altitude Long operations with DAA fit within existing ATC
Endurance (MALE) Remotely Piloted Aircraft norms as much as possible.
Systems (RPAS) into European airspace using Real-

--- Page 17 ---

• In order to reduce the effect of DAA on ATCO the runway to be nuisance alerts because
workload pilots should: such encounters would not cause a manned
IFR aircraft on final to declare a missed
o Only report conflicts that have triggered
approach. Preventing such differences
corrective or warning alerts. Reports for
between manned aircraft and RPAS,
preventive RWC alerts are not necessary.
especially those that do not have a safety
This complements the previous conclusion
benefit, would be beneficial to improve
to reduce ATCO workload.
efficiency and stakeholder acceptance of
o Only maneuver to resolve a corrective alert RPAS operations, and thus accelerate the
after ATC clearance as indicated in RTCA
integration of RPAS into the airspace.
DO-365B.
• In addition to pre-defining the horizontal route
• Pilots should be aware that non-cooperative towards contingency loiter waypoints in the
intruders can disappear from the DAA HMI if RPAS flight plan, it is also necessary to pre-
the intruder flies outside the air-to-air radar’s define the vertical profile towards such
Field Of View (FOV). It is recommended to waypoints in order to increase the predictability
depict the radar’s FOV as a toggleable feature on for ATCOs during contingency situations such
the DAA display for non-cooperative intruders. as C2 lost link. Such waypoints should be
predefined for all phases of flight, and should be
• There was general consensus among the
geographically separated from prevailing traffic
experiment participants that missed-approaches
flows to avoid conflicts during loitering.
are not always the best resolution option for
• When communications are performed using the
warning alerts on final approach as currently
back-up telephone, both ATCOs and RPAS
required by the new DAA Terminal
pilots should continue to use English and
maneuvering area Alert (DTA) function
standard R/T phraseology – it should not be
specified in RTCA DO-365B for three main
treated as a regular telephone call. Furthermore,
reasons:
a lost comms procedure should be agreed upon
o Firstly, missed approaches are not always before disconnecting the telephone if it is
the safest resolution option for all conflict necessary to disconnect the telephone for
geometries on final approach. This was operational purposes. Because the RPAS pilot is
found to be the case in experiment more likely to notice the failure of R/T he/she
scenarios where the intruder was above the should establish comms using the backup
RPAS or was overtaking the RPAS, as a telephone. Contact should be made to the last
simultaneous missed approach by the ATC center the RPAS was in contact with
intruder could potentially aggravate the except during take-off and during hand over
conflict severity in such cases. from one sector to the next. In these cases, the
pilot should contact APP and the next ATC
o Secondly, some warning alerts on final can
center in the flight plan, respectively.
be resolved using minor horizontal
resolutions after which the RPAS can safely
The next RTS planned in this series of projects
continue its landing. This was demonstrated will consider both the RWC and the Collision
in some experiment scenarios. Avoidance (CA) safety layers of DAA systems. This
will include scenarios to investigate how DAA can be
o Finally, the ATCOs considered warning
used for increasing safety during aerial work missions,
alerts caused by VFR aircraft loitering near as well as scenarios that will trigger auto-CA during

--- Page 18 ---

C2 lost link situations. Additionally, the next Measure the Efficiency Impact of a Flying
experiment will consider the use of DAA equipment RPAS in the Non-Segregated Airspace,” in
for facilitating CDTI Assisted Visual Separation 35th IEEE Digital Avionics Systems
(CAVS) to increase runway throughput for RPAS Conference (DASC 2016), 2016.
operations. Future studies will also quantify the impact
of the differences between RTCA and EUROCAE [8] Aviation Rule Making Committee
standards for DAA on operations in European (ARC), “Unmanned Aircraft Systems
airspace. The results of these future studies will be (UAS) in Controlled Airspace,” 2019.
made available to the ATM community and policy
[9] N. M. Paczam, J. Cooper and E.
makers in an effort to accelerate the full integration
Zakrzewski, “Integrating Unmanned
MALE RPAS into unsegregated European airspace.
Aircraft into NEXTGEN Automation
Sytems,” in Digital Avionics Systems
Acknowledgements Conference (DASC 2012), 2019.
The authors would like to thank the pilots and air
[10] K. Swieringa, R. Young, R. Vinona
traffic controllers that made the experiment described in this
and M. Hague, “UAS Concept of
paper possible.
Operations and Vehicle Technologies
References Demostration,” in Integrated
Cmmunications Navigation and
[1] International Civil Aviation
Surveillance Conference (ICNS 2019),
Organization, “Remotely Piloted Aircraft
2019.
System (RPAS) Concept of Operations
(CONOPS) for International IFR [11] RTCA Special Committee 228, “DO-
Operations,” ICAO, Montreal, 2017. 365 B Minimum Operational Performance
Standards (MOPS) for Detect and Avoid
[2] M. Fielding, G. Ward, R. Raposo and
(DAA) Systems,” RTCA, Washington
R. de Muynck, “Project CLAIRE
D.C., 2021.
Demonstration Report,” 2015.
[12] E. Sunil, R. Jackson, E.-J. Hartlieb, P.
[3] E. Pastor, “ERAINT Project Closeout
Kuiper, M. Suijkerbuijk, W. Poland and T.
Report,” 2015.
Dufourmont, “MALE RPAS Integration
[4] EDA, “Accomodation of Military IFR into European Airspace Part 1: Real-Time
MALE RPAS under GAT Airspace Classes Simulation Analysis of Contingencies in
TMAs,” in Integrated Communications,
A-C,” EDA, 2019.
Navigation and Surveillance Conference ,
[5] M. Perez-Batle, E. Pastor, X. Prats, P. 2021.
Royo and R. Cuadrado, “Maintaining
separation between airliners and RPAS in [13] RTCA Special Committee 228, “DO-
non-segregated airspace,” in 365 - Minimum Operational Performance
FAA/Eurocontrol ATM R&D Seminar, Standards (MOPS) for Detect and Avoid
(DAA) Systems,” RTCA, Washington
2013.
D.C., 2017.
[6] D. Geister, G. Schwoch, R. Geister
and B. Korn, “Integrating RPAS - [14] FAA, “Technical Standard Order
Published Approach Procedures vs. Local (TSO) C211,” FAA, Washington D.C.,
Arrangements,” in Integrated 2017.
Communications Navigations and
[15] E. Theunissen, B. Suarez and K. Kirk,
Surveillance (ICNS) Conference, 2017.
“Development, Integration and Testing of a
[7] C. Brando, M. Perez-Batlle, M. Lopez Stand-Alone CDTI with Conflict Probing
and E. Pastor, “Paired T-Test Analysis to

--- Page 19 ---

Support,” in Proceedings of the AIAA [18] RTCA Special Committee 228,
Infotech@Aerospace Conference, 2012. “RTCA DO-366 Minimum Operational
Performance Specifications (MOPS) air
[16] T. Langejan, E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek
Air-to-Air Radar for Traffic Surveillance,”
and J. Hoekstra, “Effect of ADS-B
RTCA, Washinton D.C., 2017.
Characteristics on Airborne Conflict
Detection and Resolution,” in SESAR
Innovation Days 2016, Delft, 2016.
[17] RTCA Special Committee 186, “DO- 2022 Integrated Communications Navigation
242A Minimum Aviation System and Surveillance (ICNS) Conference
Performance Standards for Automatic
April 5-7, 2022
Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS-
B),” RTCA, Washington D.C., 2002.