

--- Page 1 ---

Metropolis II: Benefits of Centralised Separation
Management in High-Density Urban Airspace
Andres Morfin Veytia, Calin Andrei Badea, Joost Ellerbroek, Jacco Hoekstra,
Niki Patrinopoulou, Ioannis Daramouskas, Vaios Lappas, V. Kostopoulos, V.
De Vries, Jacomijn van Ham, et al.
To cite this version:
Andres Morfin Veytia, Calin Andrei Badea, Joost Ellerbroek, Jacco Hoekstra, Niki Patrinopoulou, et
al.. Metropolis II: Benefits of Centralised Separation Management in High-Density Urban Airspace.
12th SESAR Innovation Days, SJU, Dec 2022, Budapest, Hungary. ￿hal-04054006￿
HAL Id: hal-04054006
https://enac.hal.science/hal-04054006v1
Submitted on 31 Mar 2023
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci- destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
entific research documents, whether they are pub- scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
lished or not. The documents may come from émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
teaching and research institutions in France or recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
abroad, or from public or private research centers. publics ou privés.

--- Page 2 ---

Metropolis II: Benefits of Centralised Separation
Management in High-Density Urban Airspace
A. M. Veytia, C. A. Badea, J. Ellerbroek, J. Hoekstra
Delft University of Technology, 2629HS Delft, The Netherlands
N. Patrinopoulou, I. Daramouskas, V. Lappas, V. Kostopoulos
University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece
V. de Vries, J. van Ham, E. Sunil
NLR - Royal Netherlands Aerospace Centre, 1059CM Amsterdam, The Netherlands
P. Menendez Ponte Alonso, J. Rodrigo Villazon Terrazas
NTT DATA Spain, 28050 Madrid, Spain
D. Bereziat, A. Vidosavljevic
ENAC, Universite´ de Toulouse, France
L. Sedov
Linko¨ping University, SE-581 83 Linko¨ping, Sweden
Abstract—TheMetropolisIIprojectaimedtostudytheimpact Furthermore, the question of how to control traffic within
of centralised separation management for urban aerial mobility. U-space operations still remains. Previous research has em-
Three concepts were developed in this study: a fully centralised,
phasised centralised, strategic separation management, with
strategically separated concept, a hybrid concept featuring cen-
tactical separation as a potentially federated or distributed
tralised strategic separation and distributed tactical separation,
and a fully distributed tactical concept. A comparative simu- fallback.Thequestionremains,however,towhatextent(high-
lation study was performed, using traffic scenarios based on density) drone traffic will be accurate and predictable enough
predicted demand in an urban airspace in the city of Vienna. to enable effective strategic separation, and whether proposed
Simulations were performed with varying traffic densities and
business models for urban drone applications would be com-
situations. Results show that the purely strategic and purely
patible in terms of required planning horizons.The Metropolis
tactical strategies perform comparably in terms of safety, and
that further improvements can be achieved with a combination II project aims to investigate the impact of the degree of
of those strategies. centralisationofaseparationmanagementmethodonresulting
Keywords—UnmannedTrafficManagement,ConflictDetection traffic safety, efficiency, capacity and equity. n The project
& Resolution (CD&R), Self-Separation, U-space, UAS, UTM
developed three separate separation management concepts
with varying degrees of centralisation; a centralised concept
I. INTRODUCTION
including only centralised strategic deconfliction techniques,
Urbanairtrafficmobilityisasubjectofhighinterestacross a decentralised system including only decentralised tactical
the research community, as the applications of use of aircraft deconfliction techniques and a hybrid system including both
in the Very Low Level (VLL) urban airspace are increasing. centralised strategic deconfliction and decentralised tactical
Theuse of autonomousaircraft fordelivery transportationhas deconfliction.
been suggested as a measure to combat congestion in high
density ground vehicle traffic in city centres and excessive
emissions. Unmanned Traffic Management (UTM) systems This paper presents an overview of the experimental results
needtobedesignedandtestedtoinvestigatemethodologiesfor of the Metropolis II project, regarding safety, efficiency and
integrating highly dense air traffic in the urban environment. otherperformancemetricsofthreedifferentconceptsinhighly
Previous research has been conducted with the scope dense urban airspace. Section II-A presents the design of the
of shaping future operations of small aircraft within VLL urban airspace, missions and operations used in the project.
airspace. The CORUS project [1] categorised airspace sec- The three concepts are briefly introduced in Section II-B.
tions, and defined urban airspace as being above the tallest The experimental and simulation methodology is described
obstacle in a city. However, that might not be feasible for in Section III, while the metrics used for concept comparison
missions such as local small package deliveries, as it would andthemostrelevantresultsareshowninSectionIV.Finally,
be inefficient for small aircraft to travel at such high altitudes the discussion and conclusion are presented in sections V and
in cities with very tall buildings (e.g., New York). VI, respectively.

--- Page 3 ---

II. METHODS
The following section presents the background information
ofurbanairspaceandUTMconceptdesignusedinsimulations
within the Metropolis II project. More detailed information
about the developed concept of operations can be found in
[2].
A. Urban environment
It is expected that urban air traffic will be fundamentally
differentfromconventionalaviationduetotheincreasedpres-
enceofphysicalobstacles,thehigherexpectedtrafficdensities,
the different operational characteristics, and the use of small
unmanned aerial vehicles. Globally, several developments are
undergoing for creating a concept of operations capable of
enabling aircraft operations within cities.
A large volume of these operations is expected to be
conducted within Very-Low Level (VLL) airspace, defined
by FAA [3] and EU [1] projects as being below an altitude
of approximately 500ft. Considering building heights, aircraft Figure 1. Urban airspace structure used within the Metropolis II traffic
flying at such low altitudes might be required to fly above scenariosimulations.
the existing street network for safety, efficiency and privacy
reasons. Thus, the Metropolis II project aims to include both
centres have a higher number of aircraft taking off from
constrained(i.e.,aircraftareconstrainedtoflyingabovestreets
the same location, while vertiports have less demand but are
and between buildings) and open (i.e., aircraft can fly freely
more numerous. Within this work, the percentage of traffic
above obstacles in any direction) airspace within the study.
originating from vertiports and distribution centres is 40%.
Furthermore, previous research [4] performed within con-
strained airspace has used orthogonal street networks, which
B. Description of concepts
provide an idealised traffic situation. Within the Metropolis
II project, a broader scope was taken by also considering In the Metropolis 2 project, three different separation man-
organically developed street networks, common in cities in agementconceptswerestudied,whichdifferedintermsofthe
Europe. degree of centralisation of the separation management task:
For this reason, the city of Vienna was chosen as the a centralised, a hybrid, and a decentralised concept. Table
basis for the simulation environment, due to the presence I shows an overview of the main differences between the
of a combination of orthogonal and organic street network concepts, and the following sections present a summary of
topology, and its relatively low street alignment [5]. Vienna the design choices made within each.
alsohasalowdisconnectnessindex[6],meaningthatallareas TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF THE MAIN DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE THREE
ofthecityarereachablewithoutmuchdetours.Lastly,thecity CONCEPTSANDTHEIRPROPERTIES[2].
hasagreatamountofopendataavailableforboththebuildings
Features Centralised Hybrid Decentralised
[7] and the streets [8], providing the opportunity to create a OpenAirspace Hexagonalcells Radialgrid Polygonal
more realistic simulation area. cells
Global knowl- Yes Yes No
Alongside buildings, urban airspace will have to account
edgeofflights
for areas in which flights will not be permitted, such as parks Main Pre-flight Pre-flight Strate- In-flight Tac-
or other privacy-sensitive locations. Within the Metropolis II separation Strategic gic and In-flight tical
management Tactical
project, we chose to enforce these areas using geofencing.
method
Within the experiment airspace designed for Vienna, several
geofenced areas were created within open airspace. Thus, Theopenairspacedesignisdifferentamongconceptsdueto
although aircraft may freely fly in open airspace, they are not the need for it to be compatible with the concept philosophy:
allowed to fly within these restricted areas. inadecentralisedconcept,theairspaceislessstructured,while
Vertiports and distribution centres were placed within open in a more centralised one, structure is beneficial to the global
and constrained airspace to act as origins and destinations optimisation of trajectories.
for aircraft, based on the municipal demand expected in the 1) TheCentralisedConcept: TheCentralisedconceptaims
future. These demands are based on parcel delivery data from to strategically deconflict all aircraft prior to take-off. To do
[4], [9]. A linear regression is used that takes into account this, the open airspace is structured in hexagonal cells and is
area, population size, and average annual gross salary per connected to the constrained airspace street network to enable
municipality. Fig. 1 shows how the city centre contains more use of the A* path-finding algorithm [10], [11]. The airspace
vertiports as it is expected to have more demand. Distribution isdividedinto16verticallayers,whereeachlayerisassigned

--- Page 4 ---

a heading range, similar to the layers concept created within The decentralised concept does not use any strategic sepa-
the Metropolis I project [12]. rationduringflightplanning.However,thereisacentralentity
Flightplanningandstrategicdeconflictionisperformedina that monitors the traffic in constrained airspace and updates
two-step approach. In the first step, a relaxed graph colouring the cost of travelling through the airspace. Each aircraft then
model is used to assign flight layers such that the number has the option to replan if the cost has changed due to high
of unsolved conflicts is minimised. In the second step, the traffic, but also has the option to maintain its current route.
remaining conflicts are solved by delaying the departure slot
III. EXPERIMENT
of flights.
The Metropolis II simulation experiments were designed to
In the centralised concept, a single authority is responsible
seehowthelevelofcentralisationinfluencessafety,efficiency,
for planning all flights and ensuring that all aircraft maintain
and other metrics. More detailed information about the exper-
separation throughout their mission. Flight plans are therefore
iment set up may be found in the Metropolis II reports [13]
4-dimensional (latitude, longitude, height tracked in time).
and in [2].
UAS agents are responsible for following the flight plan as
closely as possible considering their performance limitations A. Simulation software
and uncertainties. The centralised concept does not include a The experiments were simulated through fast-time sim-
tactical separation component. ulations using BlueSky, an open air traffic simulator [14].
2) The Hybrid Concept: The Hybrid concept attempts to BlueSky has an extensible plugin system, to which different
leverage the use of a central entity for flight planning and conflictdetectionandresolution(CD&R)implementationsand
strategic separation management while letting individual air- other modules can be added, allowing for testing of different
crafttacticallyseparateifnecessary.Inthehybridconcept,the concepts under similar conditions.
strategic separation component relies on using horizontal sep-
B. Simulation Area
aration while the tactical separation component uses vertical
TheMetropolisIIsimulationairspaceisan8kilometrewide
and speed-based manoeuvres to solve conflicts not predicted
and 500 feet high cylinder centered in the center of Vienna
bythecentralentity.Inopenairspace,airspaceisstructuredas
(Fig.1).Itincludesopenandconstrainedairspace.Aircraftare
a unidirectional radial grid that connects to the street network
allowedtoflywithoutconstraintsinopenairspaceunlessthere
in constrained airspace.
is a geofenced area. In constrained airspace, aircraft must fly
The hybrid concept adds an extra cost to travelling in
above streets.
constrainedairspace,toreducetrafficdensitywithinthecentre
ofthecity.Thetotalairspaceisrepresentedasagraphandthe C. Aircraft models
paths are solved using the Dijkstra algorithm. When an edge
For the Metropolis II project two aircraft types (MP20 and
isoccupiedbyanaircraftthatedgeisremovedfromthegraph
MP30) based on a simplified DJI Matrice 600 Pro hexacopter
for a certain amount of time. This means that if an aircraft is
drone performance model were used in the simulations. The
not able to find an adequate solution, it gets delayed.
difference between the two is that MP20 cruises at a speed of
This concept also makes use of 16 layers to vertically 20 kts while MP30 at 30 kts.
separate aircraft. However, there are a reduced number of
D. Missions
cruising layers when compared to the Centralised concept in
ordertoprovideaircraftwiththeoptionofusingdeconfliction Inordertoachieveadiverseandrepresentativesetoftraffic
layers for tactical conflict resolution maneuvers. patterns, and to provide a means to study the use of mission
3) The Decentralised Concept: The decentralised concept prioritisation, four mission types were defined:
only makes use of tactical separation to maintain safe sep- 1) ParcelDeliveries:Thesemissionsstartfromdistribution
aration between aircraft. The tactical separation algorithm centers and travel to a vertiport, and thus generate
employsbothspeedandaltitudebasedmanoeuvres.Inthede- converging/diverging traffic patterns;
centralisedconcept,openairspaceisdiscretisedintopolygonal 2) Food Deliveries: These missions travel from vertiport
cells in the horizontal plane. In the vertical plane, layers are to vertiport, leading to point to point traffic patterns;
usedtoseparateaircraftverticallyinfunctionofheadingrange, 3) Loiteringmissions:Pointtopointmissionsthatactivate
similar to the centralised concept (16 layers). In constrained a dynamic geofence upon arrival;
airspace, all streets are uni-directional and are assigned a 4) Emergency missions: These missions are similar to
cruise height allocation and direction. The directions are food deliveries but are announced to the UTM system
assigned in a way that ensures that the whole airspace is closer to their desired take-off time.
accessible. The directionality allocation aims to minimise the There are four levels of priority: low, medium, high, and
probabilityoftwocruisingaircraftintersectingwitheachother. emergency. The parcel, food and loitering traffic is assigned
However, due to the street network containing non-nominal in equal proportion for the first three levels, with emergency
intersections (e.g., 3-way intersections), this will not always missions having the highest priority. These levels are taken
be possible. Aircraft that turn can make use of turn layers, into consideration during tactical and strategic deconfliction
located between cruising layers. decisions.

--- Page 5 ---

E. Uncertainties and non-nominal situations
Uncertainties and non-nominal events are introduced in the
experiments in order to test the robustness of the separation
management concepts. These are in the form wind, and rogue
aircraft, respectively. Rogue aircraft are vehicles that do not
adheretotherulesdevelopedbytheconcept.Theytravelfrom
outside the airspace through the center and then back outside
the airspace, ignore traffic rules, and do not respond to the
presence and actions of other traffic. The number of rogue
aircraft in the air is kept constant during the simulation. Note
thatwhilerogueaircraftdonotfollowtherulesoftheconcept,
they still travel through constrained airspace by following the
streets. The aircraft also randomly vary altitude at several
different locations which are not known to the operators.
Rogue aircraft do not make any attempts to tactically solve
conflicts, and thus should affect the tactical components of Figure 2. Cumulative density heat map for high density for the Centralised
the concepts most. concept.
The experiments also include a limited simulation of the
effectofwindonUTMoperations.Thegoalofincludingwind
intheexperimentswastoinducespeedandtiminguncertainty, • Mission duration efficiency,
which would impact the strategic planning of concepts with a • Mission delay.
central component. Therefore, a uniform wind field is defined A conflict is counted when there is a predicted intrusion
overthewholeairspacebutonlythecomponentparalleltothe with a certain look ahead-time. This work uses state-based
direction of the aircraft affects the speed of the aircraft. This detection, meaning that trajectories are linearly extracted with
means that the aircraft will only speed up or slow down and a certain look-ahead time. The horizontal and vertical mini-
not experience cross-winds. mum separation is set to 32 metres and 25 feet, respectively.
The look-ahead time is 10 seconds.
F. Independent variables
H. Simulation time
The following independent variables were defined for the
experiments: Dependent variables were measured throughout the entire
simulation in all scenarios. Each scenario ran until all aircraft
1) Degree of centralisation: Decentralised, Hybrid, and
reached their destinations. Although flight departures are only
Centralised;
planned within the first hour, the simulation time varied
2) Traffic density: Very low, low, medium, high, and very
between 90min and 180min.
high traffic densities are used (see Table II);
3) Wind level: The speed of the uniform vector field (0,
IV. RESULTS
1, 3, and 5 knots);
The current section presents the most important results of
4) Rogue aircraft: The number of rogue aircraft at one
the Metropolis II project. The calculated metrics results are
time in the airspace (0, 33, 66, 100).
presented using boxplot graphs, each boxplot is computed
TABLEII.NUMBEROFAIRCRAFTCONCURRENTLYIN-FLIGHTFOREACH based on the value of the metrics across the 9 scenario
TRAFFICDENSITY. repetitions.
Density Averagenumberofaircraftperscenario
A. Traffic density
VeryLow 1660
Low 3340 Figs. 2, 3, and 4 show the cumulative traffic density heat
Medium 4990
maps throughout the simulations with high density traffic and
High 6650
VeryHigh 8290 40 percent of traffic coming from distribution centers for the
centralised, hybrid, and decentralised concepts respectively.
For each scenario characterised by a choice of independent Here, lighter color indicates denser traffic.
variables,ninerepetitionswereperformedusingadifferentset AcomparisonofFigs.2,3,and4revealsseveraldifferences
of randomly-generated traffic. in terms of flight planning. In Fig. 2 the hexagonal grid of
the Centralised concept is visible in open airspace. Fig. 3
G. Dependent measures
shows the radial grid of the hybrid concept. Since there was
Thedependentmeasuresshowninthisworkareasfollows: a higher cost in travelling through constrained airspace, the
• Number of pairwise conflicts, traffic tended to form a beltway around the city center. Fig.
• Number of intrusions, 4 shows the effects of the absence of strategic planning. As
• Achieved instantaneous traffic density, aircraft tend to use the shortest path though the network in

--- Page 6 ---

Figure 5. Aircraft density in constrained airspace in function of time for a
Figure3.CumulativedensityheatmapforhighdensityfortheHybridconcept. high-densityscenario.
concepts both have similar number of conflicts with the
centralised concept having slightly fewer.
Fig. 7 shows the total number of intrusions for each of the
concepts in the vertical axis and the scenario density in the
horizontal axis. Here it is clear that the hybrid concept has
the smallest number of intrusions at all traffic densities. The
decentralised and centralised concepts are more comparable
in number of intrusions. The levels appear similar at most
traffic densities, though at the very high traffic density the
decentralised concept has slightly more intrusions than the
other concepts.
As the three concepts achieved different densities within
constrained airspace, the number of intrusions is not directly
comparable. Therefore, the intrusion rate was computed in
function of aircraft density in constrained airspace, presented
Figure4.CumulativedensityheatmapforhighdensityfortheDecentralised in Fig. 8. The intrusion trend of the centralised and decen-
concept.
tralised concepts are nearly identical. Although the hybrid
concept achieves the fewest intrusions per minute per number
of aircraft in the air, the difference becomes less pronounced
constrainedairspace,therearecertainstreetsandintersections
which are more used than the others. It is also interesting to
note that the centralised concept tended to spread the traffic
more evenly in constrained airspace.
Fig.5showsthatthedecentralisedandcentralisedconcepts
have very similar instantaneous traffic densities. The peak of
the hybrid density in constrained airspace is about half of that
for the decentralised and centralised concept due to the ring-
roadstrategyusedbytheformer.Itisalsoclearthatthehybrid
concept took longer to taper off, showing that aircraft were in
the air for longer as they avoided constrained airspace.
B. Airspace safety
Fig. 6 shows the number of conflicts per flight for each
concept for the different traffic demand scenarios. The effect
of strategic pre-take-off deconfliction can clearly be seen: the
decentralised concept has the highest number of conflicts at
all densities, reaching to an order of magnitude difference at Figure6.Numberofconflictsperflightasafunctionofthescenariodensity
the high and very high densities. The hybrid and centralised forthethreeconcepts.

--- Page 7 ---

Figure7.Numberofintrusionsasafunctionofthescenariodensityforthe Figure9.Flightdurationefficiencyasafunctionofthetrafficdensityforthe
threeconcepts. threeconcepts.
Figure 8. Intrusions per minute as a function of the number of aircraft in Figure10.Averagedemanddelayasafunctionofthetrafficdensityforthe
constrainedairspaceforthethreeconcepts. threeconcepts.
when compared to the total number of intrusions presented in
concept induces notably higher delays for all densities and
Fig. 7.
presents a rapid raise in the delays with increasing density.
Threemainfactorscontributetodemanddelay.Thefirstisthe
C. Mission efficiency
departure delay applied by the concepts to the aircraft as an
The duration efficiency is an estimate of how much longer
efforttoincreasesafety.Thesecondistheroutelength,asthe
thesimulatedroutetookversusanidealroute,presentedinFig.
hybridconceptdiscouragesaircraftfromusingtheconstrained
9. The centralised and hybrid concepts both have relatively
airspaceandplanslongerroutestoavoidit.Thelastoneisthe
constant efficiencies across densities. The hybrid concept
flight time with lower speed limit or hovering while resolving
achievedaloweroverallefficiencyduetothebeltwayairspace
conflicts as a part of the tactical separation.
structure, which made missions last longer. The decentralised
concept is similar in magnitude to the centralised concept,
E. Service access and equity
however the efficiency tends to decrease with the density due
to aircraft having to resolve more conflicts tactically. Demand delay dispersion metric is used as an indicator
of equity and access to UTM services. This metric gives an
D. Mission delay
indication of how delay is distributed over airspace partici-
The average demand delay is measured as the mean of the pants.Alowvalueindicatesthatdelaywasevenlydistributed,
delay of all the flights in a scenario, presented in Fig. 10. and a higher value means that some aircraft were delayed
The centralised and decentralised concepts present similarly disproportionately more than others. It is computed as the
low values of delay, with the decentralised concept showing a standard deviation over the arrival delay of all aircraft which
slightly increasing pattern with increasing density. The hybrid arrived at their destination, where the arrival delay is the

--- Page 8 ---

Figure 11. Demand dispersion delay as a function of the traffic density for Figure 12. Additional number of intrusions as a function of the wind level
thethreeconcepts. forthethreeconcepts(1,3,and5ktswindspeed).
difference between realized arrival time and ideal expected
arrival time.
The demand delay dispersion can be seen in Fig. 11. The
decentralised concept had the lowest demand delay dispersion
which means that most aircraft were similarly delayed. In the
very low, low, and medium densities the hybrid concept had a
lower dispersion delay than the centralised concept. However,
forthehighandveryhightheeffectisreversedandthehybrid
conceptachievesvaluesabovethoseofthecentralisedconcept,
indicating that for those densities the hybrid concept applies
significantly longer delay to a subset of aircraft.
F. Effect of uncertainties and non-nominals on safety
Fig. 12 shows the additional number of intrusions due to
the presence of wind for all three concepts in a high density
Figure 13. Additional number of intrusions as a function of the number of
scenario.Thecentralisedconceptshowsaverylownumberof rogueaircraftforthethreeconcepts(33,66and100aircraft).
additional intrusions at 1 and 3 knots. However, it is higher
at 5 knots. For the hybrid concept the additional number of
intrusions is similar at 1, and 3 knots and then increases at 5 However, when looking at, e.g., flight efficiency and demand
knots. For the decentralised concept, the number of intrusions delay it can be seen that the safe performance of the hybrid
is similar across all wind speeds. However, the spread of the concept comes, in part, at the cost of flight efficiency and
numberofintrusionsmovestothepositivesideofthevertical capacity. This shows the potential benefit of the combination
axis for the 3 and 5 knots case. of strategic and tactical separation management measures.
Fig. 13 shows the additional number of intrusions due to However, not all of these differences can be attributed to the
rogueaircraftforallthreeconceptsinthehighdensityscenar- difference in degree of centralisation between the concepts.
ios. Overall, the number of intrusions increases as the number The design of the airspace was also a large factor in the
of rogue aircraft increases. The hybrid concept resulted in observed differences between the three concepts.
the lowest number of additional intrusions. The number of Firstly, because the hybrid concept made use of dedicated
intrusions for the decentralised and centralised concepts is deconfliction layers, it only has half of the allowable cruising
similar across rogue levels, although the decentralised does space compared to the centralised concept, which can have
show more spread in its results. an impact on capacity. This means that the strategic planner
has half the vertical space available. From Fig. 11 it can be
V. DISCUSSION seen that at lower densities the dispersion of the delays of the
There are a number of observations that can be made from hybridconceptwasbelowthecentralisedconcept.However,as
theresultsoftheMetropolis2conceptcomparison.Thefirstis the traffic density increased the availability of cruising space
thatthehybridconceptmanagedtoachievethelowestnumber became denser and the hybrid concept was not able to match
of intrusions of the three concepts, even when considering the centralised concept.
intrusion count as a function of instantaneous traffic density. Secondly, the beltway-like structure of the hybrid concept

--- Page 9 ---

for unconstrained airspace had aircraft in the air for longer strategicplanningdidnotdetect,duetouncertaintiesregarding
becausethestrategicalgorithmtendedtopreferthesebeltways thepositionsofallaircraft.However,thiscameattheexpense
over flying in constrained airspace. This can be seen in the of route efficiency and demand delay.
density heat maps (Fig. 3) and the instantaneous density plot The decentralised concept provided the most equitable ac-
in Fig. 5. This behaviour causes longer flight distances, but cess to the airspace. In terms of safety and demand delay, the
because of its high degree of traffic alignment (on any point decentralisedconceptwasonparwiththecentralisedconcept,
along a roundabout all vehicles are going in approximately resulting in a similar number of intrusions for both. However,
the same direction at the same speed) conflict probability can the centralised concept was able to redistribute traffic more
be reduced by a large amount. This shows that the airspace efficiently than the hybrid concept due to allowing more
structure can have a significant impact on safety, especially if aircraft in constrained airspace.
traffic is better aligned and spread out (albeit at the expense Toanswerthequestiononthedegreeofcentralisationofan
of route efficiency). urbanairtrafficmanagementsystem,weproposeanimproved
The decentralised concept does not globally optimize the hybridsystemwithmoreelaboratepathplanningandlessstrict
paths of the aircraft. It does attempt to spread traffic through strategic planning that allow higher aircraft densities.
flow control but local hotspots can still be seen within the
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
airspace. Moreover, the number of conflicts in the decen-
tralisedconceptareanorderofmagnitudehigherthanboththe This research has received funding from the SESAR Joint
centralised and hybrid concepts. However, when comparing Undertaking under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 re-
the number of resulting intrusions to the centralised concept search and innovation programme under grant agreement No
results, it can be seen that the decentralised concept is able to 892928 (Metropolis II).
maintainsimilarlevelsofintrusionstothecentralisedconcept.
REFERENCES
The higher number of conflicts, therefore, achieve reactively,
[1] CORUS consortium, “U-space Concept of Operations,” SESAR Joint
what a pre-departure optimisation algorithm does proactively.
Undertaking,Vol2.,Edition03.00.02,2019.
It is interesting that by only using strategic separation or [2] N. Patrinopoulou, I. Daramouskas, V. Lappas, V. Kostopoulos, A. M.
tactical separation, the number of intrusions remains compa- Veytia, C. A. Badea, J. Ellerbroek, J. Hoekstra, V. de Vries, J. van
Ham, E. Sunil, P. M. Ponte Alonso, J. Pedrero Gonzalez, D. Bereziat,
rable. The centralised concept was able to reduce network
A.Vidosavljevic,andL.Sedov,“MetropolisII:InvestigatingtheFuture
bottlenecks and maintain path efficiency. However, it is not ShapeofAirTrafficControlinHighlyDenseUrbanAirspace,”in2022
able to plan completely for all circumstances, therefore a 30th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED),
2022,pp.649–655.
tactical element remains indispensable. However, it can be
[3] “Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management (UTM) | Federal
difficult to effectively trade-off between both as it is seen AviationAdministration.”[Online].Available:https://www.faa.gov/uas/
from the performance of the hybrid concept in the duration research development/traffic management
[4] M.Doole,J.Ellerbroek,V.L.Knoop,andJ.M.Hoekstra,“Constrained
efficiency (Fig. 9) and the demand delay (Fig. 10).
urban airspace design for large-scale drone-based delivery traffic,”
Another interesting result is the similarity between the Aerospace,vol.8,no.2,2021.
centralised and decentralised concept in the safety results [5] G. Boeing, “Urban spatial order: street network orientation, configura-
tion, and entropy,” Applied Network Science, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–19,
within constrained airspace (Fig. 8). This can be attributed
2019.
to the nature of constrained airspace, where the action and [6] C. Barrington-Leigh and A. Millard-Ball, “A global assessment of
solutionspacearelimited.Thus,whentheseparationmethods street-networksprawl,”PLOSONE,vol.14,no.11,pp.1–16,112019.
[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0223078
are limited (i.e., using either tactical or strategic), the airspace
[7] Bauko¨rpermodell (LOD0.4) Wien. Accessed 2021-05-
network structure itself has a greater influence on the safety. 20. [Online]. Available: https://www.data.gv.at/katalog/dataset/
The results in terms of robustness to rogue aircraft show 76c2e577-268f-4a93-bccd-7d5b43b14efd
[8] “Hall of Fame/Streets complete - OpenStreetMap Wiki.” [Online].
that the hybrid concept is able to have the least number of
Available: https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Hall of Fame/Streets
intrusions for all rogue levels. This can be related to the fact complete
that the hybrid concept distributes traffic efficiently in the [9] P.Bowes,“Annualreport,”PitneyBowes,Tech.Rep.,2021.
[10] V. Duchamp, B. Josefsson, T. Polishchuk, V. Polishchuk, R. Sa´ez,
strategicphase,andthatitstacticalresolutionalgorithmproved
and R. Wiren, “Air traffic deconfliction using sum coloring,” in 2019
more effective in solving the type of conflicts that occurred IEEE/AIAA38thDigitalAvionicsSystemsConference(DASC),2019.
with rogue vehicles. [11] V. Duchamp, L. Sedov, and V. Polishchuk, “Density-Adapting Layers
towards PBN for UTM,” in ATM 2019, 13th USA/Europe Air
VI. CONCLUSION Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar, ser. ATM
Seminar 2019, Vienne, Austria, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available:
The hybrid concept was able to achieve the highest level of https://hal-enac.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02178436
safetybycombiningcentralisedstrategicanddecentralisedtac- [12] E. Sunil, J. Hoekstra, J. Ellerbroek, F. Bussink, D. Nieuwenhuisen,
A.Vidosavljevic,andS.Kern,“Metropolis:RelatingAirspaceStructure
tical separation management. The “ring road” routing method andCapacityforExtremeTrafficDensities,”inATMseminar2015,11th
helpedincreasesafetybyalargefactorinthehybridconceptas USA/EUROPEAirTrafficManagementR&DSeminar,Portugal,2015.
therewerefeweraircraftinconstrainedairspace.Thestrategic [13] “Deliverables–Metropolis2.”[Online].Available:https://metropolis2.
eu/deliverables/
planningofthehybridconceptdistributedtrafficandmitigated
[14] J. Hoekstra and J. Ellerbroek, “Bluesky ATC simulator project: an
networkbottlenecks.Moreover,thetacticalseparationstrategy open data and open source approach,” in Conference: International
further improved the safety by resolving the conflicts that the
ConferenceforResearchonAirTransportation,2016.