

--- Page 1 ---

Metropolis: Relating Airspace Structure and Capacity
for Extreme Traﬀic Densities
Emmanuel Sunil, Jacco Hoekstra, Joost Ellerbroek, Frank Bussink, Dennis
Nieuwenhuisen, Andrija Vidosavljevic, Stefan Kern
To cite this version:
Emmanuel Sunil, Jacco Hoekstra, Joost Ellerbroek, Frank Bussink, Dennis Nieuwenhuisen, et al..
Metropolis: Relating Airspace Structure and Capacity for Extreme Traﬀic Densities. ATM seminar
2015, 11th USA/EUROPE Air Traﬀic Management R&D Seminar, FAA & Eurocontrol, Jun 2015,
Lisboa, Portugal. ￿hal-01168662￿
HAL Id: hal-01168662
https://enac.hal.science/hal-01168662v1
Submitted on 26 Jun 2015
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci- destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
entific research documents, whether they are pub- scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
lished or not. The documents may come from émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
teaching and research institutions in France or recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
abroad, or from public or private research centers. publics ou privés.

--- Page 2 ---

Eleventh USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2015)
Metropolis: Relating Airspace Structure and
Capacity for Extreme Traffic Densities
Emmanuel Sunil1, Jacco Hoekstra1, Joost Ellerbroek1, Frank Bussink2,
Dennis Nieuwenhuisen3, Andrija Vidosavljevic4 and Stefan Kern5
1Control and Simulation, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft, Delft, The Netherlands
2Cockpit and Flight Operations, National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR), Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3ATM and Airports, National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR), Amsterdam, The Netherlands
4Laboratory of Applied Mathematics, Ecole Nationale de l’Aviation Civile (ENAC), Toulouse, France
5Institute of Flight Guidance, Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR), Braunschweig, Germany
Abstract—Personal and unmanned aerial vehicles have automated cargo delivery UAVs [5], [6]. In fact, the rapid
received increasing media attention over the last decade. As a emergence of PAVs and UAVs over the last decade has led
result of the growing excitement for these two aircraft types, many within and outside the aerospace industry to view these
many within and outside the aerospace industry envision a future
vehicles as important components of a future air transportation
in which large numbers of small aircraft fly over urban areas.
system. However, before this vision can materialize, an
With this vision for the future, the question arises what would be
airspace system that can safely separate and organize large
required, in terms of airspace organization, to make this feasible,
numbers of aircraft is required [7].
or indeed, if it will be possible at all. In this context, the
Metropolis project aims to investigate the influence of airspace
The difficulty of safely separating a large number of
structure on capacity, complexity, safety, and efficiency for high-
aircraft can be reduced through careful design of airspace
density airspace. To this end, four airspace concepts, ranging
structure. There is, however, no clear consensus yet on how
from a decentralized direct routing concept, to a highly
this should be done. There are, for instance, several studies
structured tube network using 4D trajectory-based operations,
have been considered. The four concepts were compared by which argue that a well-defined and structured approach is
means of large-scale simulation experiments, for multiple required to handle high traffic densities [8], [9]. In such an
scenarios that are extreme when compared to current air traffic approach, pre-planned conflict free routes are negotiated
densities. This paper presents an overview of the Metropolis between the airspace user and the Air Navigation Service
project with a focus on the project objectives, design and Provider (ANSP). In addition to the three-dimensional path that
implementation of airspace concepts, and preliminary simulation
aircraft are required to follow, the negotiated trajectories
results.
include arrival time constraints at waypoints along the route.
This way, uncertainties regarding the positions of aircraft can
Keywords - airspace structure, urban airspace design, air traffic be reduced, allowing for closer packing of several trajectories,
control, free flight, 4D trajectory based operations, Personal Aerial
and thus, increasing capacity levels over current operations.
Vehicles (PAVs), Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
In contrast, Free Flight studies have found evidence of the
opposite: the Free Flight (or unmanaged airspace) concept has
been shown to allow for higher traffic densities by reducing
I. INTRODUCTION
traffic flow constraints and structure [10], [11]. Here, aircraft
Since the early days of flight, Personal Aerial Vehicles
are allowed to fly user-preferred (often direct) routes, while
(PAVs) have been proposed as an alternative to automobiles to
separation responsibility is delegated to each individual aircraft
solve the ever-rising road traffic congestion problems affecting
by means of airborne Conflict Detection and Resolution
most urban areas [1]. Despite many failed attempts, recent
(CD&R) automation. As a result, traffic is more evenly
successful test flights of road-able aircraft designs, by PAL-V
distributed over the airspace, thus reducing the number of
in the Netherlands and by Terrafugia in the United States, have
potential conflicts, thereby increasing both capacity and safety
revived interest towards PAVs [2]. Similarly, Unmanned
[12], [13].
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have become increasingly popular as
they can be used for a wide variety of applications that The above dichotomy suggests that airspace structure and
previously required more expensive manned aircraft [3]. At capacity are tied together. What is as yet unknown, however, is
present, however, large-scale commercial UAV operations are the relationship between these two variables; i.e., does more or
still limited by most aviation authorities [4]. This is expected to less structuring lead to higher capacity? Or, is there perhaps a
change in the near future, particularly with companies such as transition point, where a further increase in capacity will
Amazon and Google pushing towards the introduction of require a switch from one approach to the other? The goal of
This research received funding from the Seventh Framework Programme of
the European Commission under grant number 341508 (Metropolis)

--- Page 3 ---

the Metropolis project, a research initiative funded through the (18.2 million), Shanghai (21.7 million) and Delhi (26.7
Seventh Framework Programme of the European Commission, million) [16].
is to answer these questions within the context of a future urban
Assumption 2: Vehicles for personal air transport have become
air transportation system integrating high volume PAV and
widely available
UAV operations. To study how capacity varies along the
dimension of airspace structure, four concepts, ranging from a As mentioned earlier, several PAV variants are already
completely unstructured Free-Flight-inspired concept, to a under development, with some models currently undergoing
highly structured tube network using pre-planned 4D flight-testing and certification [7]. Given the current pace of
trajectories, have been defined. These concepts were compared development, the technical challenges to realize a viable PAV
with the aid of large-scale simulation experiments using four are likely to be met within the time frame of the Metropolis
extreme traffic scenarios that ranged up to a density of 30,000 scenarios (2050+).
aircraft per 10,000 square nautical miles. Subsequently, the
capacity-structure relationship was inferred by comparing the Although the current work does not focus on vehicle-
concepts across the four demand scenarios in terms of safety related technical specifications, it is considered likely that both
and efficiency metrics. conventional and Vertical Take-Off and Landing (VTOL)
This paper presents an overview of the ongoing Metropolis PAVs reach the market place. Thus, it is assumed that a small
project and is structured as follows. In section II, an outline of runway will be required for terminal operations, and more
the consortium's vision for the future of urban air transportation importantly, horizontal velocity needs to be maintained to stay
is described. Next, the design and implementation of the four airborne, further constraining airspace design. Due to space
airspace concepts are discussed in section III and IV restrictions in urban areas, raised platforms above existing
respectively. In sections V and VI, preliminary simulation streets seem the most feasible solution for these 'PAV-ports',
results are presented and discussed. Finally, the main and a large number of these will need to be located throughout
conclusions are listed in section VII. a city to allow near 'door to door' operations.
For the creation of Metropolis scenarios, accurate market
II. METROPOLIS SETTING FOR 2050 AND BEYOND
predictions for PAVs are not required. Since the project centers
To provide sufficient grounding for the scenarios in this on the influence of airspace structure on capacity, it is only
project, their definition considered (extrapolations of) current necessary to ensure that sufficient traffic volume is simulated
trends in aviation technology, demographics, and societal to study this relationship. Nonetheless, it was assumed that one
demand for PAVs and UAVs. In this section, the main in six cars would be replaced by PAVs. Using the per capita
assumptions underlining the consortium's expectations for the ownership of cars in Paris [17], and a PAV market penetration
future, and the resulting influence on simulation scenarios, are of 16.7%, approximately 4.0% of the population is expected to
discussed. use PAVs by 2050.
Assumption 1: Continued population growth and urbanization
leads to the formation of mega-cities Assumption 3: Unmanned aircraft will be used for cargo
According to the United Nations, the global population is delivery
expected to increase to over nine billion by 2050 [14].
Autonomous cargo delivery UAVs are already used within
Moreover, a greater proportion of the population is expected to
the militarily domain [18]. Given the public appetite for ever-
migrate to cities, leading to rapid urbanization of rural areas, as
shorter order-to-delivery times, commercial introduction of
well as the merging of towns and cities to form vast
similar UAVs may occur within the near future. In fact, several
metropolitan areas. Similar to contemporary cities, these
companies, including Amazon, Google and DHL, are already
'mega-cities' of the future will consist of one or more densely
prototyping quad-copter variants for express delivery of
populated urban cores that are surrounded by less dense
lightweight cargo from existing distribution centers. These
suburban areas, with high levels of commuting traffic and
UAVs are likely to serve local communities surrounding a
congestion between these two areas.
distribution center, and improvements in payload capability
The Metropolis simulation scenarios use population size may allow for multiple deliveries during a single flight.
(and per capita demand) as a starting point to estimate traffic
volumes. To this end, a city the size of Paris, with a projected Future demand for UAV delivered packages is estimated
population of 14 million in 2050, is used as a baseline scenario for the Metropolis scenarios using current trends in e-
[15]. Three additional scenarios are defined with population commerce. Literature shows that the average French citizen
sizes of 18, 22 and 26 million inhabitants, such that the relation orders 13.4 parcels per annum, and 48% of these are
between airspace structure and capacity can be evaluated by categorized as express deliveries [19]. Additionally, Amazon
studying multiple traffic demand levels. It should be noted that estimates that 86% of the orders it receives are suitable for
these population sizes are not chosen to represent predictions UAV delivery [20]. Taking the net effect of these statistics, the
for a particular city, however, they are nevertheless similar to per capita demand for UAV deliveries is taken as 5.5 packages
present day populations of the following urban areas: Beijing per annum.

--- Page 4 ---

2) Common Airspace Limits for Concept Design
Heading Minimum Intruder’s
change distance protected zone To simplify simulations, and to facilitate comparison
between concepts, both PAVs and UAVs are assumed to fly
above buildings. Due to safety and privacy considerations this
Ownship
might well turn out to be the case. To separate urban air traffic
from higher and faster flying commercial aircraft, the lower
airspace region between 1100 ft and 6500 ft was selected for
Speed
change Avoidance designing the airspace concepts. Additionally, the available
vector
airspace has been further segmented to separate PAV and
UAV operations due to the significant performance and
operational differences between these aircraft types (door-to-
Intruder
door vs. local cargo deliveries), as shown in Fig. 2.
Figure 1: Geometrical conflict resolution approach of the Modified As a result of the airspace segmentation pictured in Fig. 2,
Voltage Potential (MVP) algorithm [21]
the take-off and landing phases of flight are expected to be
common for all concepts, and as such are not expected to
III. DESIGN OF AIRSPACE CONCEPTS cause significant capacity variations between the concepts.
The primary goal of this research is to investigate the effect The concept descriptions that follow therefore focus on the
of airspace structure on capacity. To empirically study this cruise phase of flight.
relationship, four airspace concepts, named Full Mix, Layers,
B. Concept 1: Full Mix
Zones and Tubes, have been defined using increasing levels of
structure to implicitly separate and organize traffic. This The Full Mix airspace concept can be most aptly described
section begins by describing some elements that are common as 'unstructured airspace', where traffic is subjected to only
to all concepts. Subsequently, the conceptual design of each physical constraints, such as weather, static obstacles and
airspace concept is discussed individually. terrain. As traffic demand is often unstructured, the Full Mix
concept assumes that any structuring of traffic flows decreases
A. Common Concept Elements
overall efficiency of the system, and that safety is actually
1) Airborne Separation Assurance System: improved by the spreading of traffic that results from self-
regulation. In the Full Mix concept, aircraft are therefore
In the Full Mix, Layers and Zones concepts, tactical
Conflict Detection and Resolution (CD&R) tasks are permitted to use the direct path between origin and
destination, as well as optimum flight altitudes and velocities,
delegated to each individual aircraft, where they are handled
to reduce fuel burn and other related trip costs. Since Full Mix
by an automated Airborne Separation Assurance System
imposes no restrictions to the path of aircraft, combined
(ASAS). The current study employs the ASAS
implementation as proposed by Hoekstra because of its heading, speed and altitude conflict resolution maneuvers are
demonstrated resolution capabilities in several complex multi- used to reduce deviations from the optimal route, for all flight
phases.
aircraft scenarios [12],[21]. While adaptation (or redesign) of
an ASAS to make it able to cope with extreme densities would
be an interesting study in itself, this was not the goal of
Metropolis, as it is focused on airspace design.
In this implementation, conflict detection is performed by
state-based extrapolation of traffic positions, within a
prescribed ‘look-ahead’ time, using traffic transmitted state
information (position, speed and heading). The Modified
Voltage Potential (MVP) algorithm is subsequently used to
resolve conflicts in a pairwise fashion. This method results in
implicit cooperative resolution strategies, where the distance
between the conflicting aircraft at the Closest Point of
Approach (CPA) is increased to (at least) the minimum
separation requirements, see Fig.1. Based on initial test runs, a
look-ahead time of sixty seconds was selected, in addition to
separation margins of 250 meters horizontally, and 50 meters
vertically.
Figure 2: Airspace region available for concept design. PAV and UAV
The types of resolution maneuvers (heading, altitude and operations are separated by airspace to take into account the performance
speed) allowed are airspace concept dependent and is differences between these aircraft types.
discussed in the relevant subsection below.

--- Page 5 ---

C. Concept 2: Layers
The Layers concept can be seen as an extension of the
hemispheric rule [22]. Here, the airspace is segmented into
vertically stacked bands, where each altitude layer limits
horizontal travel to within an allowed heading range. This
segmentation of airspace is expected to reduce the probability
of conflicts by limiting the relative velocities between aircraft
cruising at the same altitude. However, this increased safety
comes at the price of efficiency; while direct horizontal routes
are still possible, the vertical flight profile is dictated by the
relative bearing between origin and destination and the
Figure 4: Top down view of the Zones topology, which is designed to
corresponding altitude band with the required heading range.
take into account the layout of a city.
Thus flights might not be able to cruise at their optimal
altitude, resulting in higher fuel burn. An exception is made A top-down view of the Zones concept is illustrated in Fig.
for climbing and descending aircraft; these aircraft are allowed 4. Here, two major zone types can be discerned: circular and
to maintain heading while climbing or descending to their radial zones. Assuming a concentric shape for a Metropolis
destination altitude. city, the circular zones are used in a similar fashion to ring
roads in contemporary cities. The radial zones function as
Fig. 3 displays a schematic view of the Layers concept as
connections between these concentric zones and facilitate
implemented in the Metropolis project. It can be seen that that
traffic towards and away from the city center. Both types of
each layer corresponds to a heading range of 450 and has a
zones segment airspace in the horizontal plane, there is no
height of 300 ft. With these dimensions, two complete sets of
vertical segmentation. Instead, altitude is selected flexibly,
layers fit within the Metropolis airspace. This way, short
based on the planned flight distance between origin and
flights can stay at low altitudes while longer flights can
destination, while the horizontal path was computed using the
improve fuel burn by flying at higher altitudes. This is
A* shortest path algorithm [23].
expected to mitigate the efficiency drop of predetermined
altitudes in this concept. For this concept, MVP is used to separate aircraft flying
within the same zone, as well as to assist with the merging of
As mentioned earlier, the Layers concept also uses the
aircraft between circular and radial zones. Since the zone
MVP conflict resolution algorithm. While combined heading,
topology dictates the horizontal path of an aircraft, heading
speed and altitude resolutions are allowed for climbing and
resolutions are not allowed for this concept.
descending traffic, for cruising aircraft, altitude resolutions
may create new conflicts with traffic in adjacent layers.
E. Concept 4: Tubes
Resolutions are therefore limited to combined heading and
speed maneuvers for cruising aircraft. As a maximum structuring of airspace, the fourth concept
implements four-dimensional tubes that provide a fixed route
D. Concept 3: Zones structure in the air. Here, the aim is to increase predictability
of traffic flows by means of pre-planned conflict free routes.
Similar to Layers, the Zones concept segments traffic
based on similarity of travel direction. However, while the The tube topology designed for Metropolis can be thought
Layers concept structures traffic irrespective of city topology of as a graph with nodes and edges, see Fig. 5. The nodes of
(and only vertically), the Zones concept takes into account the the graph are connection points for one or more routes. The
layout of the city in the design of its structure. edges are the tubes connecting two nodes. Tubes at the same
horizontal level never intersect, except at the nodes, and are
dimensioned to fit one aircraft in the vertical and horizontal
plane.
Figure 3: Schematic view of the Layers concept. Here, each altitude band
corresponds to a prescribed heading range, reducing the relative velocities Figure 5: An example tube topology with three layers of decreasing
between aircraft at the same altitude. Two complete layer sets have been granularity. The dashed yellow lines are used to indicate the placement of
defined within the Metropolis airspace. nodes above each other. Tubes are bi-directional.

--- Page 6 ---

To provide multiple route alternatives, a total of twelve
tube layers are placed above each other with decreasing
granularity. Short flights profit from a fine grid at the lowest
layer, while at the same time, longer flights benefit from
longer straight tubes in the higher layers. A lateral offset is
used between layers to allow for smooth climb and descent
paths. As a result, aircraft are only allowed to climb through
one layer at a time.
Unlike the other concepts, the Tubes concept uses time-
based (4D) separation of aircraft to ensure safety within the
network. This mode of separation dictates that when an
aircraft passes a node, it will “occupy” this node for some
interval. Within this occupancy interval no other aircraft is
allowed to pass this node. For each node an interval list is
maintained that keeps track of the times at which a node is
expected to be occupied. New flights may only pass the node Figure 6: Map of the fictional Metropolis city. Each city block is characterized
when its necessary interval is completely free. To ensure that as either commercial (blue) or residential (red). The green trapezoid represents
the experiment area where safety metrics are logged.
separation at the nodes ensures separation within tubes aswell,
all aircraft within the same layer are required to fly at the same
Another important aspect of simulation development was
velocity, and the prescribed speed increases with the altitude
the modeling of PAV and UAV vehicle dynamics. For this
of the layer.
purpose, parameters of existing vehicle models in TMX were
adapted to match the performance specifications available for
For route planning, the A* depth-first search algorithm is
used to plan the shortest trajectory from origin to destination, several current PAVs and UAVs. Additionally, VTOL aircraft
prior to departure [23]. To ensure a conflict free trajectory, the were simulated using helicopter dynamics for take-off and
occupancy of each node along a proposed route is checked. If landing, while fixed-wing models were used for cruising,
not, the node is discarded and the algorithm backtracks to find climbing and descending flight phases. A total of three VTOL
another available solution. If no route can be found, a pre- aircraft types, two PAVs and one UAV, and a conventional
departure delay is applied in multiples of 10 seconds until a PAV were used in the traffic simulations.
conflict free route is found.
B. Design of the Fictional Metropolis City
As the Metropolis scenarios focus on a future urban air
IV. SIMULATION DEVELOPMENT AND EXPERIMENT DESIGN transportation system, a fictional city was designed to
represent the simulation physical environment.
To compare the four airspace concepts in terms of
capacity, large-scale simulation experiments were performed.
1) City Map
This section describes the development effort undertaken to
implement the concepts onto an existing simulation platform, To accommodate the population sizes of the four scenarios
(14-26 million, see section II), a large fictional city, similar in
the generation of high-density traffic scenarios, and the design
size to present-day Paris, was designed. A 40 x 40 nautical
of two separate experiments.
mile portion of the city, representing approximately 50% of
A. Simulation Platform and Concept Implementation the total city area, was used to simulate traffic, see Fig. 6.
Similar to other modern cities, the fictional Metropolis city is
The Traffic Manager (TMX) software, developed by the
divided into three major districts: city center, inner ring and
National Aerospace Laboratory of the Netherlands (NLR), is
outer ring. Moreover, to simulate realistic urban traffic
used as the simulation platform in this research. TMX is a patterns, city blocks were characterized as either commercial
medium fidelity desktop simulation application designed for or residential. This way it is possible to, for example, simulate
the investigation of novel ATM concepts. It is capable of morning rush hour as traffic converging to commercial areas.
simulating up to 5000 aircraft simultaneously, and has a wide
While traffic was simulated and performance data was
range of features including several CD&R algorithms, 4D
logged throughout the simulation area, safety related metrics
Flight Management System (FMS) guidance, and extensive
were only logged within a trapezoidal 'experiment area', see
data logging functions. For a complete overview of TMX
Fig. 6. This region, with an area of 448 NM2, has been shaped
capabilities, the reader is referred to [24].
and sized such that the area ratio between the three city
The four airspace concepts were implemented in TMX by districts are the same for the experiment area and the full
modifying the trajectory planning functions taking into Metropolis city (not shown).
account the constraints of each concept. For instance, the
2) Infrastructure
direct horizontal path and the most fuel efficient altitude were
selected for the Full Mix concept, while the for the Tubes The only infrastructure considered were PAV and UAV
concept, the A* algorithm was used to determine the shortest landing strips, as these served as the origin and destination
conflict free trajectory through a pre-defined tube network. points for traffic. For PAVs, 1600 runways were evenly

--- Page 7 ---

distributed over the simulation area, with half defined as 2) Rogue Aircraft
VTOL capable. Cargo UAVs originated from dedicated
Just as with road traffic, it is reasonable to expect some
distribution centers, and delivered packages to buildings
aircraft to not conform to airspace routing requirements for a
within a six nautical mile range. As a result of the airspace wide variety of reasons, including technical failure and/or
segmentation illustrated in Fig. 2, interaction between PAVs deliberate rule-breaking. To model this effect, for selected
and UAVs only occurs during the take-off and landing flight scenarios, 'rogue aircraft' were introduced at random time
phases. Therefore, to study this interaction, two cargo intervals. These aircraft were simulated to be seven times
distribution centers were defined near the city center. larger than other PAVs, and flew haphazardly through the
airspace with continuously varying heading and altitude. By
C. Traffic Scenarios comparing simulations with and without rogue aircraft, it is
possible to determine the effect of structure on the robustness
The traffic volumes for four scenarios were computed
of an airspace concept to non-nominal occurrences.
using the population growth and per-capita demand
assumptions stated in section II, as well considering the size of
E. Simulation Simplifications
the Metropolis simulation area relative to the total city.
Subsequently, the instantaneous number of PAVs for each To reduce the complexity of the simulation development
scenario was determined by setting the average nominal trip effort, two simplifications were made. While these
time to fifteen minutes, see Table 1. Here, the average hourly simplifications are not expected to affect relative comparisons
package demand for the two cargo distribution centers under between concepts, they are stated below for completeness.
consideration is also displayed.
1) Take-off and Landing Simulation
In addition to multiple traffic demand volumes, it is also Since take-off and landing procedures were considered to
necessary to consider different demand patterns when be similar for all concepts, the focus of the simulations was on
assessing the airspace concepts. Within the context of an the cruise, climb and descend flight phases. Furthermore, due
urban environment, the morning rush hour is characterized by to the complexity of managing runway capacity, it was
a high proportion of commuting traffic originating from decided to delete aircraft when they were within a
residential areas and converging towards commercial regions predetermined distance from the destination runway.
of a city. On the other hand, during the evening rush hour, the However, to take into account the effect of airspace structure
opposite is true, and a vast majority of the traffic is of the on approach sequencing, the time interval between two
commercial-residential type. Therefore, for each traffic successive arrivals was logged for all runways, and analyzed
volume, scenarios with converging, diverging and 'mixed' for unacceptably short intervals. It should be noted that all
traffic flows were created. Also, each scenario had a duration other flight phases were simulated.
of two hours, consisting of a forty-five minute build-up period,
2) UAV Operations
a one hour logging period, and a fifteen minute wind-down
period. As mentioned earlier, UAVs are expected to operate within
the vicinity of cargo distribution centers. Given the short flight
D. Simulation of ‘Real-World’ Phenomena
distances, it was decided to use the Full Mix concept to
To prevent a deterministic comparison of concepts, wind simulate UAV operations regardless of the airspace concept
and rogue aircraft were added to the scenarios to improve the used for PAV traffic. Consequently, safety metrics are not
realism of the simulation results. considered for UAV-UAV incidents. Nonetheless, it should
be noted that all aspects of PAV-UAV interactions are
1) Wind simulated and analyzed. In particular, UAVs are expected to
affect PAV trajectories near the PAV-UAV airspace
Wind was modeled as a uniform and time-invariant vector
boundary, as well as entry trajectories into PAV airspace.
field with random direction and speed. Although predicted
Moreover, it is reasonable to assume that conclusions drawn
wind information is often used for trajectory optimization in
from the PAV results are also applicable for UAVs.
real-life operations, its effects on aircraft flight paths was
deliberately omitted from the simulation's trajectory planning
F. Experiment Matrix
functions. In fact, wind was added to study how uncertainties
in aircraft operations, which result in deviations from the Two separate experiments were performed: the nominal
planned trajectory, affect the safety of a concept. experiment and the non-nominal experiment.
1) Nominal Experiment
TABLE 1: INSTANTANEOUS PAV TRAFFIC VOLUME AND AVERAGE
HOURLY PACKAGE DEMAND FOR THE METROPOLIS SCENARIOS The nominal experiment focused on the impact of airspace
structure on capacity. For this experiment, four levels of
Instantaneous PAV Average Hourly UAV
Scenario airspace structure and four traffic demand scenarios
Traffic Volume Package Demand
represented the experiment conditions. Six repetitions were
Low 2,625 1,380
performed for each experiment condition (two repetitions for
Medium 3,375 1,780
three traffic demand patterns). Furthermore, the scenarios
High 4,125 2,180
were simulated with and without conflict resolution, resulting
Ultra 4,875 2,580
in a total of 192 runs.

--- Page 8 ---

it should be noted that the figure does not imply that the other
concepts were able to facilitate the higher volumes safely. For
instance, if the other concepts resulted in many more
intrusions that the Tubes, it should still be concluded that
capacity is less than the Tubes concept. Conclusions with
regard to capacity will therefore also depend on other metrics
such as safety and efficiency. Moreover, safety and efficiency
metrics should be computed relative to the number of flights
simulated to allow for a fair comparison between concepts.
To be able to compare the results in Fig. 7 with current-
day airspace use, some conversions are required. As a unit for
air traffic density, often the number of aircraft per 100 x 100
NM (so 10,000 NM2) is used. Our simulation area was only
1600 NM2. To arrive at comparable density figures the
number of aircraft would have to be multiplied with 6.25 to
Figure 7: Means and 95 % confidence intervals of the number of flights per
arrive at this reference unit. It should be noted, however, that
simulation run
the protected zone dimensions have also been reduced, and
2) Non-nominal Experiment that travel speeds also deviate from current operations. Each
of these factors complicates comparison of these density
This experiment is aimed at comparing the relative
numbers with todays’ airspaces.
robustness of the concepts to non-nominal situations. For this
purpose, the four airspace concepts were compared for B. Safety
simulations with zero, four and eight rogue aircraft introduced The degree of safety of an airspace can be assessed by the
randomly during the logging hour. Once again, six repetitions number of separation violations. Here, the airspace design can
were performed, with and without conflict resolution, resulting be seen as a first layer of protection, where structure is used to
in a total of 144 runs. reduce either the number of conflicts and possibly improve
conflict geometries (which is the aim of the Layers and Zones
concepts), or to provide full protection by preventing conflicts
V. RESULTS
altogether (the Tubes concept).
More than six million flights have been simulated, of
For each of the concepts, the Conflict Resolution (CR)
which approximately three million flights have been analysed
function could be either on or off. Here, results with CR on are
for these results. Although all simulation runs had finished at
used to indicate the safety of each concept as a whole, whereas
the time of writing this paper, analysis is not yet complete, and
the results with CR off show how well each concept is able to
the results shown here are still preliminary. A selection of the
prevent conflicts from occurring, i.e., illustrate the primary
data has been made, of which there is high confidence that
function of structure.
they will remain as shown in this paper. Future analysis may,
however, still have an influence on some of the figures. Safety in terms of the number of separation violations and
the number of conflicts is illustrated in Figs. 8-10. Fig 8.
In this paper, the concepts are compared for nominal
shows the average number of separation violations per flight
conditions, in terms of capacity, safety, and efficiency metrics.
for all concepts and densities. To illustrate the influence of the
In the follow-up study, results from the non-nominal
conflict resolution function in each concept, Fig. 9 shows the
experiment as well as further analysis should provide
average number of intrusions for simulations with and without
additional insights, on which a final conclusion can be based.
CR. Finally, Fig. 10 shows the average number of conflict
alerts per run, for all concept-scenario combinations.
A. Demand Versus Capacity
In the simulations, the four concepts were compared in
four different scenarios, where traffic demand varied between
Low, Medium, High and Ultra settings, see Table 1. Fig. 7
shows the number of flights simulated during the logging
hour, per simulation run, for all combinations of airspace
concept and traffic demand. It can be seen that the Tubes
concept deviates from the other concepts for all traffic demand
conditions, which indicates that traffic demand could not be
met by the Tubes concept. This can be explained by the fact
that the Tubes concept has the ability to delay a flight before
take-off in cases where no conflict free routes could be found
between an origin and the desired destination.
The difference in the number of flights simulated for the
Tubes concept has to be taken into account when considering
the other metrics. Although Fig. 7 suggests that the Tubes
Figure 8: Means and 95 % confidence intervals of the number of intrusions
concept has a lower airspace capacity than the other concepts, per flight (with conflict resolution on)

--- Page 9 ---

Figure 9: Means and 95 % confidence intervals of the number of Figure 10: Means and 95 % confidence intervals of the number of
intrusions per flight with and without Conflict Resolution (CR) conflict alerts per flight (with conflict resolution on)
Figure 11: Means and 95 % confidence intervals of the number of Figure 12: Means and 95 % confidence intervals of route efficiency
intrusions per flight for the Full Mix and Layers concepts (with conflict (with conflict resolution on)
resolution on)
As the CD&R implementation was not optimised for these an indicator of the efficiency in terms of fuel used. Fig. 12
densities and concepts, there were still many conflicts and shows route efficiency for each concept, where efficiency is
intrusions for all concepts. Despite the goal of de-conflicting defined as the shortest (great circle) distance between origin
traffic, the resulting high traffic concentrations of the Zones and destination, divided by the actual distance travelled.
and Tubes concepts apparently has a larger effect than the Therefore, a value high numeric value implies high route
reduction of relative velocity. Both the Full Mix and Layer efficiency. A similar trend to the previous metrics can be
concepts distribute traffic over the available airspace, which observed, where the concepts with little structure (Full Mix
significantly reduced the number of conflicts and intrusions and Layers) clearly outperform the highly-structured concepts
relative to the more structured concepts. The difference (Zones and Tubes). The largest difference is observed between
between these two concepts is shown in more detail in Fig. 11. the Full Mix and the Tubes concepts, where the Tubes concept
Here it can be seen that the Layers concept has the lowest performs 1.5 times worse, compared to the Full Mix concept.
number of intrusions with increasing traffic density, a trend
that is also visible in the conflict alert plot. This may be due
VI. DISCUSSION
to the lower relative speeds within the Layers as all aircraft fly
with similar headings at each altitude level. A lower relative In the current work, fast-time simulations of extreme
velocity lowers the conflict rate, as aircraft will, on average, traffic densities have been performed in an effort to study the
meet fewer vehicles per unit time. relationship between airspace structure and capacity. In total
six million flights have been simulated of which about 50%
C. Efficiency has been used in the data analysis (the remainder consisted of
background traffic).
There are many ways to look at the efficiency of each
concept. One way is to log the amount of distance travelled. The capacity, safety, and efficiency results presented in
Both resolution manoeuvres as well as rerouting due to the this paper suggests that that a good way to structure high-
airspace structure will increase the route length, thus providing density traffic would be one that suffices, i.e., one that aids in

--- Page 10 ---

traffic separation, without unduly affecting system efficiency. statements about the applicability of these results to current
While segmentation into altitude bands with similar headings, operations.
as seen in the Layers concept, still shows a beneficial effect
when compared to the unstructured Full Mix concept, the
strict structuring as employed in the Zones and Tubes concepts VII. CONCLUSIONS
only reduces performance. For the traffic densities simulated
The results have shown that extreme traffic densities can
in this study, no reversal can be observed for this trend.
be achieved by spreading the traffic over the airspace, while
keeping structure relatively flexible. As there are still losses of
When looking at the results for demand versus capacity, it
separation in all concepts, it cannot yet be concluded that the
was observed that the pre-planed approach of the Tubes
densities simulated in this study are feasible. More conclusive
concept required a lot of airspace to provide separation. A
results would require an adaptation of the separation assurance
complete route clearance, free of conflicts, requires a
system and the flight rules. This was, however, not the focus
prediction horizon that spans the entire (planned) flight
of this study.
duration. Prediction uncertainties further aggravate this. The
discretized tube topology was therefore easily occupied, with a
From comparison of the concepts, it can be concluded that
high frequency of delayed take-offs and a lower airspace
for the nominal situations of a spread demand such as
capacity as a result. Because the other concepts did not
provided by personal air transport or delivery drones, a
incorporate these pre-takeoff constraints, they do not show this
layered concept is optimal. For the described scenario, a
behavior. This difference is further emphasized by the results
further investigation of this concept is recommended to
in terms of safety and efficiency. A consistent improvement of
investigate both the effect of the parameters (like number of
Full Mix and Layers over Zones and Tubes indicates that
layers per heading segment) and to investigate how
capacity at extreme densities benefits from little structuring of
CD&R/the flight rules should be optimised to function better
the airspace.
in this scenario.
In terms of safety, the number of conflicts and intrusions
For today’s ATM, especially for a free routing sector, this
increased proportionally with traffic density, even for the
extension of the hemisphere rule could be considered as an
Tubes concept, which aimed to avoid interactions through pre-
enhancement for safety. This especially applies to concepts
planned conflict-free routes. A possible reason for this is that
such as sectorless ATM [25], and delegated separation
the uncertainty margins were inadequate. Simulated
assurance. It will, however, also increase the safety of other
uncertainties such as wind, for instance, could have created
more traditional concepts. As there are some caveats in
trajectory offsets large enough to lead to unanticipated
translating the results of this study to today’s ATM, it is
conflicts. As tactical resolution algorithms were not used for
recommended to investigate the effects of applying the Layers
the Tubes concept, the conflicts also resulted in a large concept on scenarios similar to today’s high density airspaces.
number of intrusions. Since real-world uncertainties are
constantly changing and hard to model, this result indicates
that variations between planned and actual flight trajectories ACKNOWLEDGMENT
can have a large impact on the safety of highly structured
The authors would like to thank Pim van Leeuwen (NLR)
airspace concepts.
for his valuable contribution to the design of the Tubes
So from the results of the nominal experiment, the Layers concept, Roalt Aalmoes (NLR) for his work on metrics
concept was found to result in the best balance between safety definition, Oliver Schneider for his efforts towards the design
and efficiency metrics. When comparing the concepts with of the Layers concept, professor Daniel Delhaye (ENAC) for
present day operations, then today’s ATM could be seen as a his insights on air traffic complexity measurement, Georges
variation of the Zones concept. The future –more trajectory- Mykoniatis (ENAC) for helping with project management
based– design is similar to the Tubes concept. The Layers tasks and Marieke Suijkerbuijk (NLR) for assisting with the
concept can essentially be seen as an extension of the implementation and execution of the simulation runs.
hemisphere rule. Based on the above results, an obvious
question would be whether they can be translated to today’s
operations? Next to the lower traffic densities, two other
REFERENCES
things need to be noted. First, due to the personal air traffic [1] T. Truman and A. de Graaff, “Out of the box: Ideas about the
scenario, the traffic demand was almost uniformly distributed future of air transport (Part 2),” European Commission Services,
except for some daily patterns. Today, there is a clear demand Brussels, 2007.
beween hubs, resulting in predominant traffic flows with a
[2] E. Kolawole, “The flying car: are we there yet?,” The
similar heading, which would, in the layers concept, all be
Washington Post, 20-Apr-2012. [Online]. Available:
forced to fly at the same levels. Second, in non-nominal http://www.washingtonpost.com/
situations, such as a small opening between weather systems,
[3] Z. Sarris, “Survey of UAV applications in civil markets,” in
or one between Special-Use Airspaces (SUA), the scarcity of
Proceedings of the 9th IEEE Mediterranean Conference on
airspace will be high. The current implementation of the layers
Control and Automation, 2001.
concept would, however, still force all traffic that need to go
through the corridor to fly at the same level, leaving other [4] G. Warwick, “Unmanned Community Making Progress On
altitudes in the corridor unused. Simulations with more Airspace Access,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, 05-
comparable properties would be required to make reliable Aug-2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.aviationweek.com.

--- Page 11 ---

[5] C. Arthur and T. Editor, “Amazon seeks US permission to test [23] W. Zeng and R. L. Church, “Finding shortest paths on real road
Prime Air delivery drones,” The Guardian. 11-July-2014. networks: the case for A*,” International Journal of
[Online]. Available: http://www.theguardian.com. Geographical Information Science, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 531–543,
Apr. 2009.
[6] J.Stewart, “Google trials drone deliveries,” BBC News. , 28-
Aug-2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.bbc.com/news. [24] F. Bussink, J. Hoekstra, and B. Heesbeen, “Traffic manager: a
flexible desktop simulation tool enabling future ATM research,”
[7] M. Cummings, “A Drone in Every Driveway,” Scientific in Proceedings of the Digital Avionics Systems Conference,
American, vol. 308, no. 1, pp. 28–29, Jan. 2013. 2005.
[8] T. Prevot, V. Battiste, E. Palmer, and S. Shelden, “Air Traffic [25] B. Korn, C. Edinger, S. Tittel, D. Kugler, T. Pütz, O. Hassa, and
Concept Utilizing 4D Trajectories and Airborne Separation B. Mohrhard, “Sectorless ATM; A concept to increase en-route
Assistance,” in Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation, efficiency,” in Proceedings of the Digital Avionics Systems
and Control Conference and Exhibit, 2003. Conference, 2009
[9] J. W. Andrews, H. Erzberger, and J. D. Welch, “Safety analysis
for advanced separation concepts,” Air Traffic Control AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Quaterly, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 5–24, 2006.
Emmanuel Sunil received the MSc degree in Aerospace Engineering
[10] J. M. Hoekstra, R. N. H. W. van Gent, and R. C. J. Ruigrok, (cum laude) from TU Delft in 2014, for his work on a haptic interface for
“Designing for safety: the ‘free flight’ air traffic management unmanned aircraft collision avoidance. He is currently working as PhD
concept,” Reliability Engineering and System Safety, vol. 75, student at the Control and Simulation section of the faculty of Aerospace
no. 2, pp. 215–232, Feb. 2002. Engineering, TU Delft. His work focuses on airspace design and capacity
modeling.
[11] J. Krozel, M. Peters, and K. Bilimoria, “A decentralized control
Jacco Hoekstra has obtained his MSc, PhD and a private pilot’s
strategy for distributed air/ground traffic separation,” in AIAA
license from the TU Delft. He has worked at the Dutch National
Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit,
Aerospace Laboratory NLR for 16 years. He co-operated with NASA, the
2000.
FAA and many European organizations. The topics of his ATM research
[12] J. M. Hoekstra, R. C. J. Ruigrok, and R. N. H. W. van Gent, include 4D Trajectory based ATM, airborne separation assurance and
“Free Flight in a Crowded Airspace?,” in Proceedings of the 3rd controller-pilot data link communication. He founded the Association for
USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar, 2000. Scientific Development of ATM, was the founding director of AT-One
and head of NLR’s Air Transport Division. After serving two terms as
[13] M. R. Jardin, “Analytical Relationships Between Conflict Dean of the Aerospace Engineering faculty of the TU Delft, he is now a
Counts and Air-Traffic Density,” Journal of guidance, control, full professor at this faculty and holds a chair in CNS/ATM in the Control
and dynamics, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1150–1156, 2005. & Simulation section. Next to his research, he currently teaches
CNS/ATM, Programming in Python and Aeronautics.
[14] Department of Economic and Social Affairs, “The World
Population Situation in 2014,” United Nations Population Joost Ellerbroek received the MSc (2007) and PhD (2013) degrees
in Aerospace Engineering from TU Delft, The Netherlands, where he is
Division, New York, 2014.
currently working as an Assistant Professor. His research interests lie in
[15] National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE), the field of Communication, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS) and Air
“En résumé - Ile-de-France,” Oct-2014. [Online]. Available: Traffic Management (ATM), and in human-automation interaction.
http://www.insee.fr.
Frank Bussink started working at NLR in 1999 as an operational
research engineer. While at NLR he worked on different international
[16] Department of Economic and Social Affairs, “World
ATM R&D projects related to airborne self-separation. In January 2002
Urbanization Prospects,” United Nations Population Division,
he joined NASA Langley Research Centre as a research scientist to
New York, 2014.
support the NASA “Distributed Air/Ground Traffic Management” (DAG
[17] Service Interdépartemental de la Sécurité et de l’Exploitation de TM) and the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) programs. In
la Route, “Statistiques de traffic sur le reseau sirius en 2003,” 2007 he re-joined NLR as a subject matter expert on Aircraft Surveillance
Préfet de la région d’Ile de France, Sep. 2003. Applications Systems (ASAS), which he continued his research on. Mr.
Bussink holds a BSc in Aeronautical Engineering and a BSc in Computer
[18] G. Warwick, “Unmanned K-Max Gets Cleverer,” Aviation Engineering.
Week and Space Technology, 12-Aug-2013. [Online].
Dennis Nieuwenhuisen completed his MSc degree in Computer
Available: http://www.aviationweek.com.
Science (algorithmic design) at Utrecht University in 2002. In 2007, he
[19] R. Ducret and L. Delaître, “Parcel delivery and urban logistics - received his PhD in Theoretical Robotics at the same university. Since
changes in urban courier, express and parcel services,” in 2007 he works at NLR as an R&D engineer at the ATM and airports
Proceedings of the 13th World Conference on Transport department on a range of different topics both as engineer and as project
Research, 2013. leader.
Andrija Vidosavljevic graduated from the Faculty of Transport and
[20] D. Tam, “Amazon drones: Bold experiment or shrewd publicity
Traffic Engineering, University of Belgrade (UB-FTTE) in 2007 in the
stunt?,” CNET, 02-Dec-2013. [Online]. Available:
field of Air Transportation. He received a PhD at the Division of Airports
http://www.cnet.com.
and Air Traffic Safety from UB-FTTE in 2014. He is currently post-
[21] J. M. Hoekstra, “Designing for safety: the free flight air traffic doctoral researcher at ENAC/MAIAA lab.
management concept,” Ph.D. dissertation, Delft University of Stefan Kern completed his Master degree in Aerospace engineering
Technology, Delft, 2001. at the Technical University of Berlin. Since 2013 he is working at DLR at
the Institute of Flight Guidance focusing on analysis of runway capacity
[22] International Civil Aviation Organization, “Rules of the Air, enhancement measures as well as development and assessment of new air
Annex 2,” Jul. 2005. traffic concepts.