

--- Page 1 ---

Metropolis II: Investigating the Future Shape of Air
Traﬀic Control in Highly Dense Urban Airspace
Niki Patrinopoulou, Ioannis Daramouskas, Vaios Lappas, V. Kostopoulos,
Andres Morfin Veytia, Calin Andrei Badea, Joost Ellerbroek, Jacco Hoekstra,
V. de Vries, Jacomijn van Ham, et al.
To cite this version:
Niki Patrinopoulou, Ioannis Daramouskas, Vaios Lappas, V. Kostopoulos, Andres Morfin Veytia, et
al.. Metropolis II: Investigating the Future Shape of Air Traﬀic Control in Highly Dense Urban
Airspace. 30th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED), Jun 2022, Athenes,
Greece. pp.649-655, ￿10.1109/MED54222.2022.9837201￿. ￿hal-03827242￿
HAL Id: hal-03827242
https://enac.hal.science/hal-03827242v1
Submitted on 3 Apr 2023
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci- destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
entific research documents, whether they are pub- scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
lished or not. The documents may come from émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
teaching and research institutions in France or recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
abroad, or from public or private research centers. publics ou privés.

--- Page 2 ---

Metropolis II: Investigating the Future Shape of
Air Traffic Control in Highly Dense Urban
Airspace
N. Patrinopoulou, I. Daramouskas, V. Lappas, V. Kostopoulos
University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece
A. M. Veytia, C. A. Badea, J. Ellerbroek, J. Hoekstra
Delft University of Technology, 2629HS Delft, The Netherlands
V. de Vries, J. van Ham, E. Sunil
NLR - Royal Netherlands Aerospace Centre, 1059CM Amsterdam, The Netherlands
P. Menendez Ponte Alonso, J. Pedrero Gonzalez
NTT DATA Spain, 28050 Madrid, Spain
D. Bereziat, A. Vidosavljevic
ENAC, Université de Toulouse, France
L. Sedov
Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden
Abstract—Metropolis II aims to provide insights in what project [2], which looked at airspace structuring when
is needed to enable high-density urban air operations. It aircraft would fly above all buildings in a city. However,
does this by investigating the foundation for U-space U3/U4
thatmightnotbefeasibleincitieswithverytallbuildings
services. The final goal is to provide a unified approach for
(e.g. New York). On top of that, flying above streets can
strategicdeconfliction,tacticaldeconfliction,anddynamicca-
pacity management. Highly-dense operations in constrained increase the societal acceptability by lowering the impact
urbanairspacewilllikelyrequireadegreeofcomplexitythat on noise, privacy and perceived third party risk, when not
does not exist in modern-day air traffic management. The part of the traffic.
expected high traffic demand will require a shared use of
Thus, the scope of Metropolis II [3] is to study and
the airspace instead of assigning exclusive use of blocks of
develop methodologies to provide an Unmanned Traffic
the airspace to some flights. A unified approach for traffic
management is needed because at high-densities, airspace Management (UTM) solution for mixed airspace (open
design, flight planning, and separation management become and constrained), which includes airspace design, flight
increasingly interdependent. Metropolis II builds upon the planning, and separation management. The main research
results of the first Metropolis project. Three concepts with
question of Metropolis II may be summed up as; How
a varying degree of centralisation will be compared using
does the degree of centralisation of an Unmanned Traf-
simulations. (1) The centralised concept will take a global
approach for separation management. (2) The decentralised fic Management system including airspace design, flight
conceptaimstogivetheindividualagentsseparationrespon- planning,andseparationmanagementaffectsthesystem’s
sibility.(3)Thehybridconcepttriestocombineacentralised performance? To answer that question three individual
strategic planning agent with a robust tactical separation
concepts have been designed; centralised, hybrid and de-
strategy.
centralised, each with a different degree of centralisation.
Keywords—Separation management, Flight planning, U-
Space, Unmanned Traffic Management (UTM), BlueSky The three concepts are presented in sections II, III, and
ATC Simulator, Urban Airspace, Degree of Centralisation IV, respectively.
In high traffic densities, we believe that the design
of the airspace, the flight planning, and the separation
I. INTRODUCTION
management should not be treated as separate problems.
Theoverloadofgroundtransportationinurbanenviron- Such a system should include a concurrent design of the
ments has created the need for research on urban aerial three subsystems. Thus, each concept was independently
transportation,whichshouldbedesignedtoaccommodate designed from each other, ensuring that the subsystems
anincreasingamountofairtraffic.Parceldeliverydemand were best suited to each design philosophy.
is expected to rise in the future to millions of flights per All concepts were designed considering a set of com-
year[1].Researchhasbeenperformedinpreviousprojects mon elements and requirements, such that the experi-
for urban airspace navigation, most notably the CORUS mental results may be comparable. The concepts were

--- Page 3 ---

providedwiththebasicairspacerulesforwhichtodesign.
The airspace was designed suitable for a realistic city
structure and was separated into a constrained area, in
which the aircraft were confined to flying above the
existing street network, and an open area, in which the
aircraft do not need to follow predetermined paths. The
concepts are evaluated using the same traffic scenarios.
The experimental method employed in Metropolis II is
presented in section V.
II. THECENTRALISEDCONCEPT
The centralised concept focuses on strategic deconflic-
tionandflightplanning,whichareconductedpre-flightby
acentralentity.Thecentralentityhasaccesstoglobaldata
concerning the information about the requested flights,
the planned flights, and the real-time tracking data of en-
routeaircraft.Forthatpurpose,acentraliseddeconfliction
algorithm was developed, responsible for producing flight
plansbasedontherequesteddeparturetimeandtheorigin
and destination coordinates. In this concept, a flight plan
Fig. 1: Centralised concept airspace structure, with hexagonal
is a 4-dimensional trajectory describing the longitude,
cells in open airspace. The red polygons are geofences areas of
latitude and altitude and time. Each of the produced flight
open airspace.
plans has a fixed altitude, with the exception of the take-
off and landing segments.
Within the centralised concept, the designed airspace remaining conflicts. For the aircraft, for which a solution
structure may be described as a bi-directional graph. For was not found, the algorithm searches for the optimal
the constrained airspace the geometry of the graph is set path based on the availability of the airspace. A time-
by the street network while for the open airspace the expanded network (TEN) [8] is created for each layer,
area is divided into hexagonal tiles, each representing one where each possible aircraft movement is represented by
node of the graph, as shown in Fig. 1. Turning costs are an edge. Having removed the edges that would lead to a
addedtotheproducedgraphwiththemethoddescribedin conflict, the shortest path in the graph may be found. The
[4]. The whole airspace (open and constrained) is divided Dijkstraalgorithmisusedforthegraphsearchinthetime-
into 16 flight layers, following the recommendations of expanded network. After a flight plan has been produced,
the Metropolis project [5]. Each aircraft is assigned to it does not incur any changes and it is considered as an
one of the layers for the entirety of its flight depending obstacle for later-planned flight plans.
on its origin and destination (based on the bearing of In nominal conditions, a centralised concept, as the
the 2-dimensional vector connecting the origin to the one presented here, does not need to contain a tacti-
destination) or a layer selected from the deconfliction cal separation management system, since all conflicts
algorithm presented below. have been resolved pre-flight. However, different types
Flight planning and strategic deconfliction are con- of uncertainties could cause the aircraft to deviate from
ducted using two different methodologies depending on their designed paths and create a possible conflict. For
the demand. For low demand, the flight plan for every this reason, a centralised tactical deconfliction system is
aircraftiscomputedinitiallywithoutconsideringtheother included and has the responsibility to detect conflicts and
aircraft, using the A* algorithm. Then, flight plans are recompute aircraft trajectories to resolve them.
checked for conflicts using a quick simulation. The de-
tected aircraft pairs causing a conflict are used to create a
III. THEHYBRIDCONCEPT
conflict graph, with the aircraft as vertices and the edges The hybrid concept combines centralised and decen-
representingthedetectedconflictbetweentwoaircraft.To tralised components to achieve separation management.
resolvetheconflicts,someaircraftareassignedtodifferent The development of the hybrid concept was conducted in
layers, by formulating the problem as a graph colouring three stages: (1) the design of the airspace structure, (2)
problem [6], [7]. thedesignofthecentralisedpre-flightstrategicseparation
The high demand methodology is utilised for aircraft management, and (3) the design of the during flight
densitiesinwhichthelowdemandapproachfailstoreach tacticalseparation.Inidealconditions,thefirsttwostages
asolution.Thehighdemandmethodologyisanadditionto should be able to provide a safe and efficient solution
thelowdemandmethodologyanditiscalledtoresolvethe for the requested flights. However, due to uncertainties,

--- Page 4 ---

optimising for the length of the path and it obeys to
rulesimposedfromtheabovepresentedairspacestructure.
Since it is centralised, the central entity computing the
initial flight plans has access to information concerning
all flights to be planned. The strategic conflict resolution
algorithm in use is time-based (i.e. the edges and nodes
ofthegraphwillappearasoccupiedforcertaintimesteps
if they are in use from previously computed flight plans)
and contains four steps:
1) Flight plans with earlier desired departure time
are prioritised and computed first.("First come, first
served")
2) For each aircraft the shortest route is found using
the Dijkstra search algorithm.
3) Search for a conflict-free flight plan in the lowest
layer and if that fails repeat the process for higher
layers. The length of the route computed at step 2
is used as a baseline to compare the optimality of
the solution found.
4) Fortheaircraftthatasolutionwasnotfound,adelay
Fig. 2: The radial network used within the hybrid concept for
in their departure time is imposed.
open airspace navigation.
The decentralised tactical separation management acts
during flight and acts in two levels: the conflict detection,
resolution and trajectory recovery level and the route
replanning level. The conflict detection, resolution and
trajectory recovery level is responsible for detecting near-
future conflicts, designing a manoeuvre for the aircraft to
resolvetheconflictandaftertheconflicthasbeenaverted,
Fig. 3: The layered airspace structure used within the hybrid initialises the trajectory recovery sequence to return the
concept for constrained airspace navigation, with cruise layers aircraft to its initial trajectory in a safe manner. The
(green) and deconfliction layers (yellow).
resolution layers may be used for the conflict resolution
manoeuvres. The route replanning level is requested to
recompute a flight plan in case the corresponding flight
the aircraft may not be able to follow the designed route
plan becomes impractical due to airspace closures or
in the exact computed time, causing conflicts, which are
changes.
resolved in the third stage. In order to prevent the tactical
separation management from having a negative effect on IV. THEDECENTRALISEDCONCEPT
the efficiency and safety of the flights computed from the In the decentralised concept the responsibility of de-
strategic plan, the two act on different dimensions; strate- signing the flight plan and taking the actions to maintain
gic uses horizontal resolution and tactical uses vertical the separation distance lies to each individual agent. The
resolution. agents do not have any information about the flight plans
The developed airspace structure is described as a 3- of other agents and they are not able to include strategic
dimensionaldirectionalgraph.Inconstrainedairspace,the separation techniques while designing their flight plans,
graphfollowsthestreetnetwork,whileinopenairspacea very similar to road traffic.
radial grid is created, as shown in Figure 2. The vertical Thedecentralisedconceptmaybebrokendownintothe
axisisseparatedintolayers.Twotypesoflayersareused: development of four subsystems: airspace structure, flight
cruising layers (mostly used for the strategic separation planning, flow control (traffic control from central entity)
management) and resolution layers (mostly used for the and tactical separation management.
tactical separation management). The two types of layers The airspace structure was developed in the scope of
alternate and create a stack of layers, as presented in minimising the probability of conflicts. In the design of
Figure 3. The direction of cruising layers alternates as theairspacestructurefortheconstrainedairspaceanaddi-
the altitude increases. The vertical edges of the graph are tional objective was considered; a turning aircraft should
bi-directional, allowing ascending and descending. not have a major impact on the cruise flow. To respect
The centralised pre-flight strategic separation manage- bothobjectivestheconstrainedairspacestructurecontains
mentisresponsibleforcomputingconflict-freepathswhile onlyone-waystreetswiththetrafficbeingdistributedinto

--- Page 5 ---

Fig. 4: The layered airspace structure used by the decentralised
conceptinconstrainedairspacetominimisetheconflictsbetween
cruising aircraft at intersections.
Fig. 5: Overview of the constrained airspace structure used
withinthedecentralisedconcept,withredandbluestreetshaving
different cruise layer height allocations.
layers. The design contains cruise layers, turn layers and
empty layers, the types of the layers alternate while the
altitude increases, as shown in Figure 4. Under nominal
circumstances the aircraft cruise along a street using a
cruiselayeranduseturnlayersonlyforturning(changing
streets). Cruise layers of intersecting streets should not be
allocated in the same altitude, which created the need for
theexistenceoftheemptylayers.Thestreetsweregrouped
intotwocategoriesbasedontheirbearing,creatinggroups
of semi-parallel streets, in order to allocate the altitude of
the cruise layers in each street, seen in Figure 5. After
that, the directionality of each street was selected using a
geneticalgorithmtooptimisethegraph’sconnectivity.The
Fig. 6: A section of the open airspace with the cells used from
airspace structure for the open airspace utilises the results
the decentralised concept. The no fly zones are the filled in
from the first Metropolis project [5] and it vertically
blue polygons. The cells are delineated with black edges and
separates traffic based on the heading of the aircraft. the centre points of the cells are represented with red dots.
For the decentralised concept, the calculation of the
flight plans can be described as a path planning problem
with known and static obstacles and dynamic costs. To Thedecentralisedconceptalsocontainsacentralentity,
solve the path planning problem, we created a graph which gathers the aircraft’s position data and computes
describingthewholeairspace.Fortheconstrainedairspace the traffic densities in the traffic groups. Depending on
thegraphdesignwasobviousandwasbasedonthestreets’ the computed traffic density, the central entity applies
structure, while for the open airspace a graph was created geovectors [11] in the traffic groups in the form of speed
using cell decomposition techniques [9]. The outcome of limits. In a real world implementation the central entity
the cell decomposition algorithm is presented in Figure would also be responsible for the authorisation process
6. The D* Lite algorithm [10] was selected as the path and for approving a requested flight plan with the agent
planning algorithm to compute the shortest path on the providing the flight start time, origin and destination
designed graph. The main reason D* Lite was selected coordinates.
is the algorithm’s ability to recompute the path on-line, As stated at the beginning of the section, the de-
which offers a significant advantage for the decentralised centralised concept relies only on tactical separation to
concept as the aircraft replan every time a new geovector resolveconflicts,whichsignifiestheimportanceoftactical
isimposedfromthecentralentityasdescribedinthenext separation in this case. The proposed tactical separation
paragraph. algorithm is speed-based and allows only for vertical

--- Page 6 ---

manoeuvres. The conflict resolution algorithm is called
from a conflict detection algorithm which detects the
conflicts and classifies them as one of the following three
types: overtake, horizontal and vertical.
The main attributes of each concept and the and differ-
ences between them are summarised in Table I.
TABLE I: Overview of the main difference between the three
concepts and their properties.
Features Centralised Hybrid Decentralised
OpenAirspace Hexagonalcells Radialgrid Polygonalcells
Strategic Yes Yes No
separation
Main Strategic Strategic and Tactical
separation Tactical
management
method
Centralentity Flightplanning, Flight planning Traffic density
responsibility strategic sepa- and strategic measurement Fig. 7: BlueSky showing simulated traffic in Vienna.
rationandtacti- separation and imposing
calseparation geovectors
Global knowl- Yes Yes No
edgeofflights permits the open publication of source code and results.
It was essential that the selected simulation software for
V. EXPERIMENTALMETHOD Metropolis II is open source, to enable project-specific
additions and modifications. Therefore, an important part
The Metropolis II project aims at studying the perfor-
ofMetropolisIIwastoextendBlueSkyforurbanairtraffic
mance of different centralisation levels on flight manage-
simulations. The major developments from Metropolis II
ment and separation management in the urban airspace.
are:
To conduct that study three different concepts have been
developed, as presented in the above sections. The three 1) Autopilot modifications to ensure aircraft closely
concepts were designed to abide to a set of commonly follow their intended path between buildings and
definedrequirements,whichremainsconstantforalltested perform turns safely.
scenario. 2) Inclusion of building polygons as geofences.
3) Bulk waypoint processing.
• Cylindrical airspace volume (8 kilometre radius, 500
4) Visualisation of urban maps (Fig. 7).
feet height)
• Constrained airspace street network and buildings. Eachconcepthasdevelopedtheirownpluginstoensure
• Open airspace with geofenced areas. that the simulations follow the rules set by the specific
• Traffic pattern and density including priority and concept.
loitering missions.
B. Traffic scenarios
• Two types of vertical take-off and landing (VTOL)
vehicleswith20and30knotscruisingspeedsrespec- The selected simulation environment is based on the
tively. city map of Vienna and is a mixture of two types of
• Uncertainties (wind and rogue aircraft, not adhering airspace: constrained airspace and open airspace, creating
to the rules). an overall cylindrical experimental area with a radius of
Theyaretestedinasetofscenariosviasimulationusing 8 kilometres and a height of 500 feet. The constrained
the BlueSky Open Air Traffic Simulator [12] and their airspacerepresentsthecitycentreandwhileflyinginitthe
performanceisevaluatedusingasetofpredefinedmetrics. aircraft should follow the street network of the city. The
The following subsections provide an introduction to the open (unconstrained) airspace surrounds the constrained
simulation software in use and present the scenarios used airspaceandrepresentstheouterpartofthecity.Theopen
for the experiment, as well as the experiment variables. airspaceincludessomenoflyzones,whichtheaircraftare
The performance of each concept is evaluated using as not allowed to use during their flight. Aircraft in the open
set of 35 metrics across 5 categories: access and equity, airspacemayflyinanytrajectorythatdoesnotviolatethe
capacity, efficiency, environment, safety and priority. no fly zones. In order to create a variety of experimental
setups, a set of traffic scenarios has been created. These
A. Simulation software
seek to simulate various types of missions (e.g., point to
The simulations will be performed with BlueSky [12], point,hubandspoke),severaltrafficdensitylevels,aswell
an open air traffic control simulator, available on GitHub as vehicles with different cruise velocities. Two vertical
[13]. BlueSky is an open source simulator originally take-offandlanding(VTOL)aircraftwereincluded,based
developed for conventional air traffic simulations, and on the DJI Matrice 600: one with a cruise speed of 20

--- Page 7 ---

knots, and another with a cruise speed of 30 knots. The Another interesting discussion is about how the con-
producedtrafficscenariosdifferentiateintheexperimental cepts will respond to the uncertainties of wind and rogue
variables described in the next subsection. aircraft. Wind uncertainties are expected to disturb the
strategicplanofthecentralisedandhybridconcepts.Wind
C. Experiment variables
uncertainty will slow and speed up drones across the
Four experimental variables were selected: traffic de- airspace and potentially create conflicts that the strategic
mand level, mission mix, wind and rogue aircraft. Each planning did not foresee. The wind will stress the tactical
traffic scenario is created by selecting a value for each of separations solutions of the centralised and hybrid con-
the experimental variables. cepts. For the decentralised concept, the wind is expected
The traffic demand level indicates the number of re- tohaveasmallereffectonthenumberofconflictsbecause
quested flights and may take one of the five different thetaskofsolvingconflictsisdesignedtobeoriginallyin
values, each representing a different percentage of the the tactical side. Rogue aircraft may have similar effects
maximum estimated demand. The number of requested onthesafetyofalltheconcepts.Also,rogueaircrafthave
flights corresponding to each of the values was calculated the potential to create head-on conflicts that the concepts
based on the estimated yearly demand of Vienna using a try to avoid with their airspace structure.
regressionandaninterpolationanalysiswithinputdatafor The last remark to mention is the time and memory
the area, the population, the average annual gross salary complexity required for each concept implementation. To
and parcel market data [14], [1]. start with the decentralised concept, the concept was
Themissionmixdescribestheallocationofthemission designed to allocate most of the computational load to
types as a percentage of the overall flight number of the separate agents according to common decentralised archi-
scenario. The main mission types considered are parcel tectures. In order to evaluate the concept, it had to be
delivery and food delivery. Food delivery missions have tested in simulation, which runs using one core of one
a higher variety of origins and destinations, while parcel computer. It quickly become clear that testing an initially
deliveries tend to origin from a smaller set of distribution designeddistributedsysteminonecomputationalunitasa
centres. In every mission mix a small number of loitering singlethreadprogramrequiresagreatamountoftimeand
and emergency missions are added. The particularity of memoryoptimisation.Toresolvethatproblem,thedecen-
theloiteringmissionisthattheyapplydynamicgeofences tralisedconcept’scodewasgreatlyoptimisedandapartof
(no fly zones) around their area of mission, while the the data required as simulation input was pre-computed.
emergency missions are announced shortly before the Whilethecomputationalcostofthedecentralisedconcept
requested departure time. wasahurdletoovercomeforthesimulationrequirements,
The wind and rogue aircraft variables are described as it would not be presented while designing for a real-
uncertainties,astheyaretheonesgeneratingnon-nominal world system in which the computational load could
conditions. These experimental variables have two values actually be allocated among agents. So, reduction of the
ON or OFF. computational load might not be of the same importance
for the decentralised concept as it is for the centralised
VI. DISCUSSION and hybrid. Both of the later concepts when applied to
Metropolis II is currently ongoing, however, some a real-world situation, they would be required to conduct
pointsofinteresthavealreadyappearedfromourresearch the total of the flight planning and strategic separation
so far. Here we intend to present the main challenges we management in one central entity. When designing such a
encounteredwhiledevelopingthethreeconceptsandsome system, someone should consider the time limitations set
remarks generated from the progress of our research. from the system requirements and the memory limitation
Constrained airspace poses challenges not present in set from the computational unit in use and the effect on
open airspace. It severely limits the total airspace volume the capacity of the system.
since aircraft must fly between streets to avoid buildings.
VII. CONCLUSION
This severely reduces the total capacity as compared to
open airspace. One goal of the simulations is to create The use of the urban airspace for transportation pur-
traffic densities that stress the capacity to their limit. poses is anticipated to be in high demand in the near
This is meant to stress the strategic planning capacity of future. Operational concepts and airspace configurations
both the centralised and hybrid concepts. Moreover, the needtoberesearched,inordertodesignsafeandefficient
limited vertical space makes tactical conflict resolution urban UTM systems. Metropolis II seeks to contribute to
more difficult because of the reduced space. This will theresearchforU-spaceU3/U4servicesthatarecrucialto
stress the tactical separation solutions of the hybrid and supporthighurbanairtrafficdensities.Thispaperpresents
decentralised concepts. However, it is expected to affect the main research goals of the Metropolis II project
the decentralised concept more as aircraft do not have a and the experimental methodology followed to achieve
globally deconflicted path. them. Three concepts with varying levels of centralisation

--- Page 8 ---

regardingflightplanningandseparationmanagementhave [11] J. Hoekstra, J. Ellerbroek, E. Sunil, and J. B. Maas, “Geovec-
been designed as part of the project. The concepts have toring: Reducing Traffic Complexity to Increase the Capacity of
UAVairspace,”2018InternationalConferenceonResearchinAir
beenintroducedinsectionsII,III,andIVandeachofthem
Transportation,2018.
includes an airspace structure design, flight planning and [12] J.HoekstraandJ.Ellerbroek,“BlueskyATCsimulatorproject:an
separation management (strategic and/or tactical depend- opendataandopensourceapproach,”inConference:International
ConferenceforResearchonAirTransportation,2016.
ingonthetypeofconcept).Theconceptsweredeveloped
[13] TUDelft-CNS-ATM, “Bluesky: The open source air traffic sim-
for a city which contained open and constrained airspace. ulator.” https://github.com/TUDelft-CNS-ATM/bluesky, Accessed
The evaluation of the performance of the concepts will 18-Feb-2022.
[14] P. Bowes, “ 2.0 Shaping our next century of growth ,”
be conducted with simulations on a variety of traffic
2020. https://www.pitneybowes.com/us/our-company/annual-
scenarios, as explained in section V. report.html,Accessed8-Feb-2022.
As described in this paper, several lessons have been
learnt already from designing, implementing and proto-
typing the concepts. The simulations planned are likely
to generate a great amount of measurements, which will
be used to create the data for around 35 metrics. These
will be used in a trade-off analysis to select the most
promising of the three concepts. As the final part of the
project, the selected concept will be presented in a real-
world demonstration.
The final results of the simulations conducted for the
project are still under the processing stage and will
be uploaded at https://doi.org/10.4121/19700002 when fi-
nalised.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has received funding from the SESAR
Joint Undertaking under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 892928 (Metropolis II).
REFERENCES
[1] M.Doole,J.Ellerbroek,andJ.Hoekstra,“Estimationoftrafficden-
sity from drone-based delivery in very low level urban airspace,”
JournalofAirTransportManagement,2020.
[2] CORUS consortium, “U-space Concept of Operations,” Edition
03.00.02,SESARJointUndertaking,Vol2.,2019.
[3] Metropolis II Consortium, “Metropolis II,” 2022.
https://metropolis2.eu,Accessed8-Feb-2022.
[4] S. Winter, “Modeling Costs of Turns in Route Planning,” GeoIn-
formatica,vol.6,pp.345–361,Dec.2002.
[5] E.Sunil,J.Hoekstra,J.Ellerbroek,F.Bussink,D.Nieuwenhuisen,
A. Vidosavljevic, and S. Kern, “Metropolis: Relating Airspace
Structure and Capacity for Extreme Traffic Densities,” in ATM
seminar 2015, 11th USA/EUROPE Air Traffic Management R&D
Seminar,2015.
[6] V.Duchamp,B.Josefsson,T.Polishchuk,V.Polishchuk,R.Sáez,
and R. Wiren, “Air traffic deconfliction using sum coloring,”
in 2019 IEEE/AIAA 38th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
(DASC),2019.
[7] V. Duchamp, L. Sedov, and V. Polishchuk, “Density-Adapting
Layers towards PBN for UTM,” in ATM 2019, 13th USA/Europe
AirTrafficManagementResearchandDevelopmentSeminar,ATM
Seminar2019,(Vienne,Austria),June2019.
[8] M. R. Silver and O. L. de Weck, “Time-expanded decision net-
works: A framework for designing evolvable complex systems,”
SystemsEngineering,vol.10,no.2,pp.167–188,2007.
[9] M. C. E. G. Galceran, “A survey on coverage path planning for
robotics,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 61, no. 12,
pp.1258–1276,2013.
[10] S. Koenig and M. Likhachev, “D*lite,” in Eighteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, p. 476–483, American As-
sociationforArtificialIntelligence,2002.