

--- Page 1 ---

Delft University of Technology
Modeling Airspace Stability and Capacity for Decentralized Separation
Sunil, Emmanuel; Ellerbroek, Joost; Hoekstra, Jacco; Maas, Jerom
Publication date
2017
Document Version
Final published version
Published in
12th Seminar Papers
Citation (APA)
Sunil, E., Ellerbroek, J., Hoekstra, J., & Maas, J. (2017). Modeling Airspace Stability and Capacity for
Decentralized Separation. In 12th Seminar Papers: 12th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and
Development Seminar
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10.

--- Page 2 ---

Twelfth USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2017)
Modeling Airspace Stability and Capacity for
Decentralized Separation
Emmanuel Sunil, Joost Ellerbroek, Jacco Hoekstra and Jerom Maas
Control and Simulation, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering
Delft University of Technology (TU Delft)
Delft, The Netherlands
Abstract—In the context of decentralized separation, airspace To develop appropriate capacity modeling methods, it is
stability pertains to the propagation of conflict chain reactions first necessary to establish a commonly accepted definition of
as a result of tactical conflict resolution maneuvers. This notion capacityfordecentralization.Atafundamentallevel,capacity,
of airspace stability has been used in previous literature to
regardless of location or type of separation management, can
developasemi-empiricalmethodfordeterminingthecapacityof
a decentralized direct-routing airspace concept in the horizontal be considered equivalent to the density at which the airspace
plane. The present paper extends this method by explicitly mod- becomes saturated, i.e., the density beyond which no further
eling: a) the effect of a given Conflict Detection and Resolution demandcanbeaccommodatedwithoutsignificantlydegrading
(CD&R)strategyonthestabilityoftheairspace;b)theinfluence macroscopic system properties such as safety and efficiency.
of direct-routing on instantaneous conflict probability; and c)
In line with this view of capacity, previous research has
the impact of finite-time measurements on the determination
of airspace states. To validate the resulting analytical capacity identifiedairspacestability,whichconsidersthepropagationof
model,fast-timesimulationswereperformed.Theresultsindicate conflicts as a result of tactical conflict resolution maneuvers,
that the predictions of the analytical model are close to that of as an important metric to determine the saturation density
theprevioussemi-empiricalapproach.Thus,theanalyticalmodel
of decentralized airspace [5], [6]. These studies have shown
can be used to obtain a first-order estimate of the maximum
that tactical conflict resolutions can destabilize the airspace
theoretical capacity, as along as simulation settings do not cause
the ‘local’, or per aircraft, conflict rate to deviate significantly at high traffic densities by triggering conflict chain reactions
from assumptions made during the model derivation. Future due to the scarcity of airspace and due to the type of CD&R
work will focus on relaxing model assumptions, and extending algorithm used. Previous work has also presented the Domino
the modeling approach to three-dimensional airspace.
Effect Parameter (DEP) as a measure of stability [5], [6], and
Keywords—ATMperformancemeasurement;airspacecapacity it has been used to develop a semi-empirical model to de-
models; airspace stability; Domino Effect Parameter (DEP); de-
termine the capacity of a decentralized direct-routing airspace
centralized separation; self-separation; BlueSky ATM simulator
concept in horizontal plane [7]. While this approach provides
an innovative and practical means of measuring capacity
for decentralization, it requires time consuming simulations
NOMENCLATURE
to asses the factors affecting capacity for different airspace
C = ConflictCount configurations and/or CD&R strategies.
N = AircraftCount This paper extends the aforementioned semi-empirical ap-
p = Instantaneousconflictprobabilitybetweentwoaircraft proach by explicitly modeling the effect of a given CD&R
2
p s = Effectofstructureononinstantaneousconflictprobability algorithm on airspace stability, and by taking into account the
V = TrueAirspeed influenceofdirect-routingoninstantaneousconflictprobability
t l = ConflictDetectionlook-aheadtime (the later from our prior work). Additionally, the impact of
D sep = Horizontalseparationminimum finite-time measurements on the determination of airspace
A = Airspacearea
stateshasalsobeenconsideredtofurtherimprovetheaccuracy
T = Analysistime
of the resulting analytical capacity model. This model is
L(cid:22) = Averageflightdistance
parametrized by physical airspace and CD&R parameters,
k = ExtradistancesearchedforconflictsduetoCD&R
cdr and it is intended to obtain a first-order estimate of airspace
r = Rateofconflictperaircraftperunitdistance
c
capacity, and to study the factors affecting capacity.
(cid:26) = Trafficdensity
Subscripts: To validate the derived model, fast-time simulations of a
= Withconflictresolution decentralized direct-routing airspace concept in the horizontal
wr
= Withoutconflictresolution plane are performed. Simulations are performed for several
nr
= SteadyState/Instantaneous traffic demand densities, and for multiple values of model rel-
ss
total = Total evant CD&R parameters. Here ‘state-based’ conflict detection
max = Maximum and the Modified Voltage Potential (MVP) conflict resolution
algorithms are used as a case-study. The accuracy of the mod-
eling approach is evaluated by comparing model predictions
I. INTRODUCTION
to those determined using the semi-empirical method.
Decentralization of traffic separation responsibility, from This paper begins with an overview of the most relevant
groundbasedAirTrafficControllers(ATCo)toeachindividual aspects of prior work in section II. In section III, an analytical
aircraft,hasbeenproposedasameanstoimproveairspaceca- model of airspace stability and capacity is derived. This is
pacity[1]–[3].Tosupportdecentralization,significantresearch followed in sections IV and V with the design and results
effort has been devoted towards the design of novel Conflict of fast-time simulations used to validate the analytical model.
Detection and Resolution (CD&R) algorithms [4]. However, Finally, the main conclusions are summarized in section VI.
the extent to which decentralization affects airspace capacity
is not well understood. Moreover, conventional capacity mod- II. PREVIOUSRESEARCH
eling methods, such as those related to ATCo workload, are Theanalyticalcapacitymodeldevelopedinthispaperbuilds
not relevant for decentralized control. on previous research on measuring airspace stability and

--- Page 3 ---

( )
2(cid:25) 2 (cid:11)
p = 1(cid:0) sin (4)
s (cid:11) (cid:11) 2
Here, (cid:11) is the magnitude of the allowed heading range
for aircraft cruising at the same flight level (e.g. 180o for
the hemispheric rule). This expression is valid for the case
where all aircraft have equal airspeed. For airspace with no
constraints, i.e., direct-routing airspace, (cid:11) = 360o = 2(cid:25) rad,
and thus p =1.
s
Fig.1. TheDominoEffectParameter(DEP)comparessimulationswithand Sinceamodelforp s hasbeendeveloped,theonlyremaining
withoutConflictResolution(CR)tomeasureairspacestability term that needs to be modeled to extend the semi-empirical
method from [7] to an analytical model is k . This is the
capacity, and on modeling instantaneous conflict probability. cdr
main contribution of the current paper.
This section provides an overview of these topics.
III. DERIVATIONOFANANALYTICALAIRSPACE
A. Measuring Airspace Stability
STABILITYANDCAPACITYMODEL
Airspace stability relates to the occurrence and propagation
Inthissection,thesemi-empiricalmethodof[7]isextended
of conflict chain reactions when tactical Conflict Resolution
to an analytical capacity model for ‘state-based’ Conflict
(CR) is used. Stability can be measured using the Domino Ef-
Detection (CD) and the Modified Voltage Potential (MVP)
fect Parameter (DEP) [5], [6], and can be visualized using the
Conflict Resolution (CR) algorithms. The goal of the deriva-
VenndiagraminFig.1.Here,C isthesetofallconflicts
totalnr tion is to model the DEP in terms of airspace and CD&R
without CR, and C is the set of all conflicts with CR,
totalwr parameters.Thus,modelsforthenumberofconflictswithand
for identical traffic scenarios. Furthermore, three regions can
without CR, and a model of the explicit effect of CD&R on
be identified in Fig. 1; R1, R2 and R3. By comparing R3
stability, are developed.
with R1, the proportion of ‘destabilizing’ conflicts caused by
CR can be determined. Thus, the DEP is defined as [5], [6]: A. Modeling the Rate and Number of Conflicts Without
R3(cid:0)R1 C Conflict Resolution
DEP = = totalwr (cid:0)1 (1)
1) Global Instantaneous Conflict Rate
C C
totalnr totalnr
The modeling process begins with the global instantaneous,
A high DEP value implies high airspace instability. Note or steady-state, conflict rate per unit time for all aircraft
that conflicts are defined as predicted losses of separation. without CR, C . As aircraft move independently of each
ssnr
other without CR, C has been modeled in literature as the
ssnr
B. Relating Airspace Stability to Capacity expected value of a binomial random variable model that is
summed over all aircraft in the airspace [2], [7]:
Using the DEP, a semi-empirical model to measure the
capacity of a decentralized direct-routing airspace concept
in the horizontal plane was developed in [7]. In that paper, 1 ∑Nss N (N (cid:0)1)
e o x f p a re ir s s s p io ac n e sf p o a r r C am to e ta te ln rs r , a a n n d d C w to e ta r l e wr su w b e s r t e itu fo te r d mu in la t t o ed E i q n . te 1 rm to s C ssnr = 2 (N ss (cid:0)1)p 2 = ss 2 ss p 2 (5)
i=1
approximate the DEP as:
Here, N is the steady-state number of aircraft, and p is
ss 2
DEP (cid:25) (cid:26) ac (2) theinstantaneousconflictprobabilitybetweenanytwoaircraft.
(cid:26) (cid:0)(cid:26) Note that the number of conflicts is divided by 2 in the above
max ac
expression so that conflicts between the same two aircraft are
Here, (cid:26) is traffic density, and the term (cid:26) is defined to
ac max not counted twice at a given moment in time.
be the maximum theoretical capacity of the airspace because
For a conflict to occur between two aircraft, their trajecto-
the DEP, and therefore the number of conflict chain reactions,
ries must intersect, and the intersection should occur within
becomes infinite when (cid:26) approaches (cid:26) . In [7] (cid:26) was
ac max max the look-ahead time, t , used for CD. Therefore, p can be
expressed as: l 2
computedbymultiplyingtheprobabilitiesforthesetwoevents
1 occurring.
(cid:26) max = D (cid:1)k (cid:1)p (3) The chance that any two trajectories intersect at some point
sep cdr s in time, p , depends on the route structure, and it has been
s
Where D is the horizontal separation minimum, k modeled in our prior work, see Eq. 4. The chance that this
sep cdr
accountsfortheeffectofCD&Ronairspacestability,andp s is intersection occurs within t l depends on the CD method, and
theeffectoftraffic/routestructureontheinstantaneousconflict thetotalairspaceareaunderconsideration,A.For‘state-based’
probabilitywithoutCR.Sincenoexplicitanalyticalmodelsfor CD,aircraftdetectconflictswithina‘conflictsearcharea’,A c ,
k w c a d s r p a r n o d po p s s ed we to re d d e i t s e c r u m ss in e e d i c n ap [ a 7 c ] i , ty a , s i e .e m ., i- b e y mp d i e r t i e c r a m l i a n p i p n r g oa th ch e d ai e r fi cr n a e f d t v b e y lo t c l , ity the wi s t e h pa n r o at r io es n ol m ut i i n o i n mu V(cid:22) m nr , D s s e e e p F a i n g d . 2 th . e C a o v n e fl r i a c g t e s
(cid:26) that fit the DEP logged during fast-time simulations to are detected if the Closest Point of Approach (CPA) of an
max
Eq. 2 in a least-square sense. intruder aircraft is located in A c . Thus p 2 is defined as:
A 2 D (cid:1)V(cid:22) (cid:1)t
C. Relating Traffic Structure to Instantaneous Conflict p 2 = A cp s = sep A nr lp s (6)
Probability Without Conflict Resolution
As mentioned in section II-C, for direct-routing airspace
Our prior work on different methods of structuring traffic
p = 1. Nonetheless, it is left in the subsequent steps for
s
revealed that relative velocity played an important role on
completeness. Substituting Eq. 6 in Eq. 5 yields the following
the instantaneous conflict probability between two aircraft [8].
for C :
This understanding was subsequently used to model the re-
ssnr
( )
lationship between these two variables for motion in the N (N (cid:0)1) D (cid:1)V(cid:22) (cid:1)t
ss ss sep nr l
horizontal plane without CR [9]: C ssnr = A p s (7)

--- Page 4 ---

Here, N is the total number of aircraft that flew
totalnr
through area A during the analysis time interval T without
CR. N can be written in terms of known parameters
totalnr
by noting that the rate of introduction of aircraft needed to
maintainaconstanttraffincdensityinareaAmustbeequalto
N (cid:1)V(cid:22) =L(cid:22) .SinceN =(cid:26) A,N canbeformulated
ss nr nr ss ac totalnr
as:
( )
N V(cid:22) V(cid:22)
N = ss nr T +N =(cid:26) A nr T +1 (13)
Fig. 2. Area searched for conflicts, Ac, for ‘state-based’ conflict detection. totalnr L(cid:22) ss ac L(cid:22)
HereAisthetotalairspaceareaunderconsideration.Aconflictoccursifthe nr nr
ClosestPointofApproach(CPA)ofanintruderaircraftisinsideAc. ThefirsttermontherighthandsideofEq.13isthenumber
of aircraft that started their flights during the analysis time
interval, and the second term is the number of aircraft which
are already present in the airspace at the start of the analysis
time.Thissecondtermwasnotexplicitlymentionedin[7],but
needs to considered since these aircraft also affect C .
totalnr
Using the model of C from Eq. 10, and by substituting
totalnr
Eqs. 12 and 13 into Eq. 11, r can be formulated as:
cnr
( )
2 p (cid:1)D (cid:1)V(cid:22) (cid:1)T2 (cid:26) (cid:0) 1
r = s sep (nr ac )A (14)
Fig. 3. Conflict duration decreases linearly near the end of a finite analysis cnr (2T (cid:0)t l ) V(cid:22) nr T +L(cid:22) nr
time interval T, if conflicts are counted at the time of detection. Here t l is
theCDlook-aheadtime. B. Modeling the Rate and Number of Conflicts With
Conflict Resolution
2) Total Number of Conflicts for a Given Time Interval
The total number of conflicts without CR, C , can be When an aircraft performs a CR maneuver, it deviates from
totalnr
computed by integrating the global instantaneous conflict rate, its nominal path, see Fig. 4. This increases the total distance
C ,overananalysistimeinterval,T,anddividingtheresult flowncomparedtothecasewithoutCR,i.e.,greenrectanglein
by ss t n h r e average duration of a conflict without CR, t(cid:22) : Fig. 4. Additionally, for each detected conflict, an extra area
cnr
∫ of airspace is searched for conflicts, but not flown through,
1 T C T i.e. red rectangle in Fig. 4. Thus when computing the total
C totalnr = t(cid:22)
cnr 0
C ssnr = s t(cid:22) s
c
n
n
r
r
(8) n
b
u
o
m
th
b
t
e
h
r
es
o
e
f c
p
o
ro
n
c
fl
e
i
s
c
s
t
e
s
s
p
n
er
ee
u
d
ni
t
t
o
d
b
is
e
ta
t
n
ak
ce
en
fo
i
r
nt
a
o
s
a
i
c
n
c
g
o
le
un
fl
t
i
:
ght, C 1wr ,
If conflicts are counted at the time of detection, then t(cid:22) is ( )
equivalent to t l for infinite time horizons. However, for c fi n n r ite C 1wr = L(cid:22) nr +k cdr C 1wr r cwr (15)
timemeasurements,asduringfast-timesimulations,thelogged
Here, r is the rate of conflicts per unit distance for a
duration,orlifetime,ofaconflictdecreaseslinearlyattheend cwr
single aircraft with CR, and the term in the parenthesis is the
of the measurement time interval of length T, see Fig. 3, as
logging stops sharply at a specified time. For such cases, t(cid:22) totaldistancesearchedforconflictsduringonecompleteflight.
cnr This distance increases linearly with the number of conflicts
can be calculated as the area of the shape under the graph in
detected, and the rate of increase of the ‘extra’ distance
Fig. 3, over the measurement time interval T:
searched per conflict, k , is dependent on the selected CD
( ) cdr
Tt (cid:0) 1t2 t and CR strategy and settings. This parameter is modeled in
t(cid:22) cnr = l T 2 l =t l 1(cid:0) 2T l (9) section III-C. Solving Eq. 15 for C 1wr gives:
L(cid:22) (cid:1)r
Note that the effect of finite time measurements on conflict C 1wr = 1(cid:0) n k r (cid:1) cw r r (16)
counts were not considered in [7]. Using the fact that N
ss
= cdr cwr
(cid:26)
by
ac
s
A
ub
,
s
w
ti
h
tu
e
t
r
i
e
ng
(cid:26) a
E
c
q
i
.
s
9
ai
i
r
n
s
t
p
o
ac
E
e
q
d
.
e
8
n
:
sity,C totalnr canberewritten
int
F
er
r
v
o
a
m
l,
C
C
1wr ,the
,
t
c
o
a
t
n
al
b
n
e
um
fo
b
rm
er
u
o
la
f
t
c
e
o
d
n
a
fl
s
i
:
ctsduringtheanalysis
totalwr
C =
2 p
s
(cid:1)D
sep
(cid:1)V(cid:22)
nr
(cid:1)T2(cid:1)(cid:26)
ac
(cid:1)A((cid:26)
ac
(cid:0)1=A)
(10)
C totalwr =C 1wr N totalwr (17)
totalnr 2T (cid:0)t Here, N is the total number of aircraft that flew
l totalwr
though area A during the analysis interval T with CR. Substi-
3) Local Conflict Rate
tuting Eq. 16 into Eq. 17 results in:
Inadditiontotheglobalinstantaneousconflictrate,fordecen-
tralized traffic it is also necessary to consider the local, or per
aircraft, conflict rate per unit distance without CR, r . To
cnr
this end, r can be expressed as the ratio between the the
cnr
total number of conflicts during a single flight without CR, Vnr tl
C , and the average flight distance of an aircraft through
ar 1 e n a r A without CR, L(cid:22) :
nr
C
r = 1nr (11)
cnr L(cid:22)
nr
Subsequently, C can be written as a function of C :
1nr totalnr
Fig. 4. Resolving conflicts increases the total area of airspace searched for
C = C totalnr (12) conflictsduetoconflictdetection(red)andconflictresolution(green).Here,
1nr N anarbitraryresolutionstragetyispictured.
totalnr

--- Page 5 ---

N (cid:1)L(cid:22) (cid:1)r
C = totalwr nr cwr (18)
totalwr 1(cid:0)k (cid:1)r
cdr cwr
To continue the derivation of C , [7] uses two assump-
totalwr
tions to relate the cases with and without CR:
1)N (cid:25) N : Although CR increases traffic density
totalwr totalnr
duetolongerflights,itisalsoexpectedtoincreasetheaverage
distance flown by proportional amount. Thus the total number
ofaircraftisnottoexpectedvarysignificantlywithCR,ascan
be seen by applying this rationale to Eq. 13.
2)r (cid:25)r : This assumption stems from the fact that there
cwr cnr
are no preferred directions/routes for a decentralized direct- Fig. 5. Left: Parameters used to define a horizontal conflict. Right: Corre-
routing airspace concept. Hence conflicts are equally likely spondingsolutionfortheMVPCRalgorithm.Adaptedfrom[10]
in all directions, and performing conflict resolutions is not
Fig. 5 can be computed for a given conflict angle, (cid:18), and
expected to change the rate of conflicts per unit distance for
distance to closest point of approach, D , as well as using
a single flight compared to the case without CR. This also cpa
the velocities of the ownship and intruder aircraft (taken to
implies that the total number of conflicts for a single flight
be equal in this study). For the situation shown, the relative
is higher with CR, as resolutions increase the total amount of
velocity vector of can be calculated as:
airspace searched for conflicts, as illustrated by Eq. 15.
These assumptions are also used in this work, and their va- V⃗ =V⃗ (cid:0)V⃗ (23)
liditywillbeexaminedinsectionV.Usingtheseassumptions, rel o i
the expression for C totalwr can be rewritted to use N totalnr Here, V⃗ o and V⃗ i are the (conflicting) velocity vectors of
(Eq. 13) and r cnr (Eq. 14): the ownship and intruder aircraft, receptively. These velocity
vectors can be written as a function of the (cid:18):
N (cid:1)L(cid:22) (cid:1)r
C (cid:25) totalnr nr cnr [ ]
totalwr 1(cid:0)k cdr (cid:1)r c(nr )
(19)
V⃗ o =
[
V(cid:22) nr ;0 T
]
(24a)
(cid:25) (cid:26) ac A ( (cid:7) V(cid:22) nr T + ) L(cid:22) nr V⃗ i = V(cid:22) nr cos((cid:0)(cid:18));V(cid:22) nr sin((cid:0)(cid:18)) T (24b)
(2T (cid:0)t ) V(cid:22) T +L(cid:22) (cid:0)k (cid:7)
l nr nr cdr
Here, (cid:7) is defined as: Subsequently, the distance between the ownship and the
( ) Closes Point of Approach (CPA), D , and the corresponding
rel
(cid:7)=2 p (cid:1)D (cid:1)V(cid:22) (cid:1)T2 (cid:26) (cid:0) 1 (20) position vector from the ownship, D⃗ rel , can be calculated as:
s sep nr ac A
(cid:12) (cid:12) √
(cid:12) (cid:12)
D = t (cid:1)(cid:12)V⃗ (cid:12)+ D2 (cid:0)D2 (25a)
rel l rel sep cpa
C. Modeling the Extra Distance Searched Per Conflict Reso-
lution Maneuver V⃗
D⃗ = rel D (25b)
As mentioned earlier, C
totalwr
is dependent on k
cdr
, which rel jV⃗
rel
j rel
is the extra distance searched for conflicts, per conflict res-
olution maneuver. From Fig. 4, it can be seen that k is The distance vector between the two aircraft, D⃗, can be
cdr
composed of two components; 1) the extra distance searched computed using the property that D⃗, D⃗ and D⃗ form a
rel cpa
due to CD, k cd , and 2) the extra distance searched due CR, right angle triangle:
k cr . Therefore, k cdr can be expressed as: [ ]
k cdr =k cd +k(cid:22) cr (21) D⃗ = (cid:0) D D r c e p l a D D c r p e a l (cid:1) j V V ⃗ ⃗ rel j (26)
rel
Alargevalueofk increasestheamountofextraairspace
cdr To minimize ownship path deviations, the MVP resolution
searched for conflicts, and thus also increases the chance of
conflict chain reactions. Therefore k cdr is strongly related velocity vector, d⃗V mvp , is directed along D⃗ cpa , and is scaled
to airspace stability, and is dependent on the underlying suchthattheintrusiondistance,D i ,iscoveredwithinthetime
algorithms and settings used for CD and CR. Below, models to the closest point of approach, t cpa :
for k and k are developed for ‘state-based’ CD and for
cd cr D D⃗
the Modified Voltage Potential (MVP) CR algorithm. d⃗V = i (cid:1) cpa (27)
mvp t D
cpa cpa
1) Extra Distance Searched Due to Conflict Detection
Foreverydetectedconflict,anextraareaofairspaceissearched Here, D⃗ cpa , t cpa and D i are defined as:
for conflicts, but not flown through. For ‘state-based’ CD, this
distance, k cd , corresponds to the length of the red rectangle in D⃗ = D⃗ (cid:0)D⃗ (28a)
Fig. 4: cpa rel
D
k cd =V(cid:22) nr t l (22) t cpa = jV⃗ rel j (28b)
rel
2) Extra Distance Searched Due to Conflict Resolution D i = D sep (cid:0)D cpa (28c)
To determine the extra distance searched for conflicts due to
one conflict resolution for MVP, k cr , consider the conflict Using d⃗V mvp , the solution velocity vector with which the
situationandthecorrespondingMVPsolutionshowninFig.5. ownship should fly to resolve the conflict, V⃗ , can be
o;sol
MVP uses the conflict geometry to compute an appropriate computed:
‘shortest-path’ resolution vector that minimizes deviations
from the nominal track. The conflict parameters shown in V⃗ =V⃗ +d⃗V (29)
o;sol o mvp

--- Page 6 ---

( )
(cid:21) = V(cid:22) T +L(cid:22) (2T (cid:0)t ) (33a)
nr nr l
(cid:26) (cid:0) 1 1
(cid:13) = ac A = (33b)
k (cid:7) 2 k (cid:1)p (cid:1)D (cid:1)V(cid:22) (cid:1)T2
cdr cdr s sep nr
Substitution of Eq. 33 into Eq. 32 yields:
(cid:26) (cid:0) 1
DEP = a(c A ) (34)
(cid:21)(cid:13)(cid:0) (cid:26) (cid:0) 1
ac A
Fig.6. ExtradistancesearchedduetoconflictresolutionbyMVPforDsep= Since (cid:26) ac >> 1=A for most practical cases, Eq. 34 can be
2:5nauticalmiles,t
l
=5mins,andVnr =500kts approximated as:
(cid:26)
Finally,theextradistancesearchedduetooneCRmaneuver DEP (cid:25) ac (35)
with MVP, k , can be calculated by comparing the distance (cid:21)(cid:13)(cid:0)(cid:26)
cr ac
traveled in the time needed to solve the conflict, t , for
cpa Intheaboveequation,theDEP,andthereforethenumberof
ownship velocities before and after resolution:
conflictchainreactions,tendstoinfinityasthe(cid:26) approaches
ac
(cid:21) (cid:13). Therefore (cid:21) (cid:13) is defined to be the maximum theoretical
k ((cid:18);D )=jV⃗ jt (cid:0)jV⃗ jt (30)
cr cpa o;sol cpa o cpa capacity of the airspace:
( )
This approach of calculating k cr implies that aircraft fly V(cid:22) nr T +L(cid:22) nr (2T (cid:0)t l )
trajectories parallel to their original flight tracks after the (cid:26) =(cid:21)(cid:13) = (36)
max 2 k (cid:1)p (cid:1)D (cid:1)V(cid:22) (cid:1)T2
conflictisresolved,i.e.,aircraftdonorecovertheirpre-conflict cdr s sep nr
flightpaths.ThisisconsideredtobeacceptablesincemostCR
Here, k and p are modeled with Eqs. 21 and 4, respec-
cdr s
maneuvers using MVP result in very small path deviations.
tively. Note that all terms in Eq. 36 have been fully defined
Eq. 30 indicates that k cr is dependent on (cid:18) and D cpa . To in the derivation presented in this section. Also, on comparing
understand this dependence, Eq. 30 is evaluated for the entire Eqs. 3 and 36, the effect of the differences in the derivation
range of (cid:18) and D cpa , for D sep = 2:5 nautical miles (NM), process compared to that in [7] are evident.
t = 5 mins, and V = 500 kts (the settings used for the
l nr
‘Baseline’ fast-time simulation, see section IV-C), see Fig. 6. IV. FAST-TIMESIMULATIONDESIGN
Tocalculatek ,itisnecessarytodeterminetheweighted- Fast-time simulations of a 2D decentralized direct routing
cdr
average of the extra distance searched during one CR maneu- airspace concept were performed to validate the analytical
verwithMVP,k(cid:22) .ThiscanbedonebyintegratingEq.30over capacity model derived in this paper. This section describes
cr
all (cid:18) and D , taking into account the distributions of (cid:18) and the design of this experiment.
cpa
D for a decentralized direct-routing airspace concept:
cpa A. Simulation Development
∫ ∫ 1) Simulation Platform
Dsep (cid:25) k ((cid:18);D )W W d(cid:18)dD The BlueSky open-source ATM simulator, developed at TU
k(cid:22) cr = 0 ∫ 0 0 Dse c p r∫ 0 (cid:25) W c D p c a pa W (cid:18) (cid:18) d(cid:18) D d cp D a cpa cpa (31) D Bl e u lf e t S , k w y a h s as us n e u d m a e s ro t u h s e f s e i a m tu u r l e a s tio in n cl p u l d a i t n fo g rm the in ab t i h li i t s y r t e o se s a im rc u h - .
late more than 5000 aircraft simultaneously with CD&R1. For
Here, W and W are the distributions of D and (cid:18)
Dcpa (cid:18) cpa more information on BlueSky, the reader is referred to [11].
respectively.Foradirect-routingairspaceconcept,thereareno
headinglimitationsonaircraft,andthustheheadingsofaircraft 2) Airborne Self-Separation Automation
can be expected to follow a uniform distribution. Correspond- As mentioned previously, state-based CD and the Modified
ingly, W can be modeled as a uniform distribution, and VoltagePotential(MVP)CRalgorithmsareusedinthisstudy,
W shou D ld cp b a e modeled as a triangular distribution. Due to the seesectionsIII-BandIII-Cformoredetails.Itshouldbenoted
(cid:18)
highly nonlinear nature of the integrand of Eq.31, a numerical thatCDwasperformedassumingperfectknowledgeofaircraft
approach has been used to solve Eq.31 and compute k(cid:22) in states as a recent study concluded that ADS-B characteristics
cr
this work. Using a modern computer, this can be done within have little effect on the performance of the CD&R algorithms
a few minutes for a reasonable discretization of (cid:18) and D . usedhere[12].Sincehorizontalflightisconsidered,combined
cpa
heading and speed conflict resolutions are used.
It should be noted that for the values of V and t used to
nr l After a conflict was resolved, aircraft recovered their pre-
compute Fig. 6, k =41:67 NM. Thus k contributes more
cd cd conflict airspeed and heading, and flew trajectories parallel
to k than k when using state-based CD and MVP. This is
cdr cr to their pre-conflict flight paths, i.e., they did not return to
logicalasMVP,asstatedearlier,usesshortest-pathresolutions.
their pre-conflict trajectories. This was done to match the
modeling of the k term of the analytical capacity model,
cr
see section III-C2. Nonetheless, as MVP uses minimum-path
D. Modeling Capacity using the Domino Effect Parameter deviation resolutions, the offset from the planned sector exit
waypoint is not expected to be significant.
Using the expressions developed for C and C
in the previous paragraphs, a model for to D ta E lw P r can no to w tal b nr e B. Traffic Scenarios
developed by substituting Eqs. 19 and 10 into Eq. 1: 1) Testing Region and Flight Profiles
A large square en route sector of 500 x 500 NM was used as
( )
thephysicalenvironmentfortrafficsimulations.Atotalof396
V(cid:22) T +L(cid:22) (2T (cid:0)t )
DEP = ( nr ) nr l (cid:0)1 (32) entry/exit waypoints were defined on the edges of the sector,
V(cid:22) T +L(cid:22) (2T (cid:0)t )(cid:0)k (cid:7) with a spacing of 5 NM (corner waypoints were intentionally
nr nr l cdr
removed). The trajectories of all traffic were required to cross
To further analyze Eq. 32, (cid:21) and (cid:13) are defined to be equal
to: 1BlueSkycanbedownloadedfromhttps://github.com/ProfHoekstra/bluesky

--- Page 7 ---

TABLEI
SIMULATIONPARAMETERS
Parameter Value Description
A 250,000 NM2 Simulation area
V(cid:22) 550 kts Speed when conflict free
nr
L(cid:22) 435.5 NM Average flight distance
nr
T 1 hr Analysis time duration
∆t 0.05 s Simulation time-step
sim
∆t 1.00 s CD&R time-step
cdr
thesquaresectorwithdirectroutesi.e.,foraparticularaircraft, Fig. 7. Heading distribution of representative scenario. Scenarios were
designedtohaveuniformheadingdistributions.
the entry and exit waypoint could not be located on the same
side of the sector. When an aircraft exited the sector, it was
TABLEIII
deleted from the simulation. Additionally, all aircraft flew at EXPERIMENTCONDITIONS
the same speed when conflict-free, see Table I.
2) Scenario Generation Condition Separation Minimum Look-Ahead
A scenario generator was created to produce traffic scenarios Name D [NM] t [mins]
sep l
with a desired and constant traffic density, and with a uniform Baseline 2.5 5.0
heading distribution. Constant density scenarios were required
Half Look-Ahead 2.5 2.5
sothattotalthenumberofconflictsloggedduringasimulation
Double Separation 5.0 5.0
run could be attributed to a particular density, and a uniform
heading distribution was required to ensure that there were no
confirmed that the above approach produced uniform heading
preferred directions in a scenario, as would be the case for
distributions;D=0.0076,p>0.05forthedistributioninFig.7.
decentralized direct-routing airspace.
Since aircraft were deleted from the simulation as they
C. Independent Variables
exited the sector, to realize constant density scenarios, aircraft
Twoindependentvariablesweredefinedfortheexperiment.
were introduced into the simulation at rate, ! , equal to:
ac
The first independent variable was traffic demand density, for
(cid:26) AV(cid:22) which ten scenarios have been defined, see Table II. The
! ac = ac L(cid:22) nr (37) second independent variable was concerned with the settings
nr used for CD&R, namely look-ahead time and horizontal sep-
Here, (cid:26) ac is the desired traffic density, A is the airspace aration minimum. Using different combinations of these two
areausedforsimulation,V(cid:22) isaverageaircraftspeedandL(cid:22)
parameters,threeexperimentconditionshavebeendefined,see
nr nr
is average flight distance through the sector. These and other Table III.
constantsimulationparametersarelistedinTableI.Usingthis For each demand density, ten repetitions were performed
approach, ten traffic demand scenarios of increasing density using different traffic realizations. Additionally, each scenario
were defined, see Table II. was simulated with and without CR to compute the DEP.
To create scenarios with uniform heading distributions, it This resulted in a total of 600 simulation runs (ten demand
was necessary to ensure that there were no biases in selecting scenarios (cid:2) three CD&R conditions (cid:2) ten repetitions (cid:2) two
entry and exit waypoints for aircraft. This was achieved in CR settings).
threesteps.Inthefirststep,thenumberofavailableexitpoints
per entry point was kept the same for all waypoints. Given D. Dependent Variables
the constraint that all aircraft routes had to cross the square To validate different components of the analytical capacity
sector, corner waypoints were removed. In this way, 297 exit model derived in section III, model predictions for the fol-
points met this constraint for all waypoints. In the second lowing six dependent variables are compared to that of the
step, the entry point for each aircraft was selected using a previous semi-empirical capacity measurement method:
uniformly distributed random variable, and a particular entry 1) Globalinstantaneous conflict rate without conflict resolu-
point could only be selected multiple times if all other entry tion, C , Eq. 5
points had been selected once before. In the final step, all 2) Total n s u sn m r ber of conflicts without conflict resolution,
exit points meeting the aforementioned routing constraint for C , Eq. 10
a particular entry point were assigned an equal probability of 3) To to ta ta l ln n r umber of aircraft with and without conflict reso-
being selected. Fig. 7 illustrates the heading distribution of a lution, N and N , Eq. 13
representative simulation scenario. Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests 4) Local con to fl t i a c lw t r rate with tot a a n ln d r without conflict resolution,
r and r , Eq. 14
TABLEII
cwr cnr
5) Extra distance searched with per conflict resolution ma-
TRAFFICDEMANDSCENARIOS
neuver, k , Eq. 21
cdr
6) Airspace capacity, (cid:26) , Eq. 36
Density Number of max
#
[ac/10,000 NM2] Instantaneous AC E. Simulation Procedure and Data Logging
1 1.00 25.00 To minimize unsystematic variation in the results, stan-
2 1.51 37.67 dardized simulation conditions were used. For a particular
3 2.27 56.75 repetition of a traffic demand scenario, the creation times
4 3.42 85.50 of aircraft and entry/exit waypoint combinations were kept
5 5.15 128.82 constant across all three experiment conditions. Additionally,
6 7.76 194.08 scenarios had a duration of 2.5 hours, consisting of a 1.5hr
7 11.70 292.40 traffic volume buildup period and a 1hr logging period.
Two types of conflict logging were used. Periodic logging
8 17.62 440.54
was used to record the number of active conflicts and aircraft
9 26.55 663.73
intheairevery15seconds,andwasusedtocomputetheglobal
10 40.00 1000.00
instantaneous conflict rate. All other dependent variables were

--- Page 8 ---

(a)BaselineExperiment (b)HalfLook-AheadExperiment (c)DoubleSeparationExperiment
Fig.8. GlobalinstantaneousconflictratewithoutCR.ExperimentconditionsaredescribedinTableIII.Scatter:simulationdata;Curve:LSFtoEq.5.
(a)BaselineExperiment (b)HalfLook-AheadExperiment (c)DoubleSeparationExperiment
Fig.9. TotalnumberofconflictswithoutCR.ExperimentconditionsaredescribedinTableIII.Scatter:simulationdata;Curve:LSFtoEq.10.
computedusingconflictdatafromevent-drivenlogging,which given by Eq. 5. The accuracy of the model is determined by
kept track of the properties of conflicts as soon as they comparingtheLSFvalueofthep terminEq.5,whichisthe
2
occurred. instantaneous conflict probability between any two aircraft, to
It should be noted that conflicts with CPAs outside the the p value computed using the model given by Eq. 6.
2
simulationareawerenotloggedorresolvedbecausethetraffic From the shape of the curves in Fig. 8, it can be concluded
density was zero outside the simulation area. On a similar that the general structure of Eq. 5 well represents C for
ssnr
note, pop-up conflicts at the start of an aircraft’s flight, with all three experiment conditions, and that changes to the look-
a look-ahead distance less than V t , were also not logged ahead time and the separation minimum have proportional
nr l
or resolved, since these conflicts occurred due to the finite changes to the global conflict rate, as suggested by the ana-
simulation area used. All other conflicts, including multiple lytical model of p . Moreover, the absolute accuracy of the
2
conflicts between the same aircraft pair, were used logged, analytical model for p is found to be quite high for the
2
resolved and used in the analysis. ‘Baseline’ and ‘Double Separation’ experiments. On the other
hand,itislessaccurateforthe‘HalfLook-Ahead’experiment.
V. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION Thissuggeststhatthe‘conflictsearcharea’forstate-basedCD
Using data from the fast-time simulations, the absolute in the p 2 model is sensitive to changes to the look-ahead time
accuracy of the analytical capacity model, (cid:9) , is assessed andmaynotbewellapproximatedbyarectangularshape,see
model
by comparing it to the previous semi-empirical method using Fig 2. An explanation for this is given in section V-G.
the following simple expression:
B. Total Number of Conflicts Without Conflict Resolution
j" (cid:0)" j Fig. 9 shows the results for the total number of conflicts
(cid:9) =100%(cid:0) model fit (38)
model "
fit
without CR, C totalnr . The corresponding model for C totalnr
isgivenbyEq.10.Modelaccuracyisevaluatedbycomparing
Here, " is the model prediction, and " is the Least- the LSF value of the p term in Eq. 10, which is the effect of
model fit s
Square Fit (LSF) of the semi-empirical method to the sim- traffic structure on instantaneous conflict probability, to the p
s
ulation data, for a particular airspace state. Additionally, all value computed analytically using its model in Eq. 4.
figures display the LSF curve of the appropriate model to ThecurvesinFig.9wellrepresenttherelationshipbetween
the simulation data (scatter points). Thus, the shape of the C andtrafficdensity,indicatingthattheoverallstructure
totalnr
LSF curve relative to the simulation data is an indication of of Eq. 10 is valid. Once again, model accuracy is shown
overall ‘soundness’ of the modeling approach used by both to be quite high for the ‘Baseline’ and ‘Double Separation’
theanalyticalandsemi-empiricalmodelingmethods,whilethe experiments, and is the lowest for the ‘Half Look-Ahead’
absolute accuracy of the analytical model can be evaluated experiment.Nevertheless,incontrasttotheglobalconflictrate
using the above equation. withoutCR,accuracyisgreaterthan85%forallcases.Thisis
explainedbyconsideringtheexpressionforC inEq.10.
A. Global Instantaneous Conflict Rate Without Conflict Reso-
totalnr
Here it can be seen that a change in the look-ahead time only
lution
affects C if the difference between the total analysis
totalnr
Theresultsfortheglobalinstantaneousconflictratewithout time ( during which conflicts are counted) and the look-ahead
CR, C , are displayed in Fig. 8. The model for C is time is small. This is not the case for the ‘Half Look-Ahead’
ssnr ssnr

--- Page 9 ---

E. ExtraDistanceSearchedPerConflictResolutionManeuver
Unlike the other dependent variables, no explicit expression
fork intermsofCD&Rcharacteristicswasdevelopedinthe
cdr
previoussemi-empiricalcapacitymeasurementmethod.Infact,
the analytical modeling of k is a additional step added to
cdr
derivationprocedure of thesemi-empirical method. Therefore,
to determine the accuracy of the analytical k model, the
cdr
averagek loggedforalltheconflictsduringthesimulations
cdr
is compared to model predictions, see Table V. Note that the
analytical model for k is given by Eq. 21, which is in turn
cdr
defined in terms of k using Eq. 22 for state-based CD, and
cd
k(cid:22) using Eq. 31 for the MVP CR algorithm.
cr
Table V indicates that the predictions of the analytical k
Fig. 10. Total number of aircraft with and without CR for the ‘Baseline’ cdr
model are very close to the average values logged during the
experiment.Scatter:simulationdata;Curve:LSFtoEq.13.
simulations for all three experiment conditions. Since k is
cdr
TABLEIV inversely related to airspace stability, the derivation procedure
ACCURACYOFTHELOCALCONFLICTRATEMODEL described in section III-C can thus be used to understand
the effect of changes to CD&R parameters on conflict chain
Baseline HalfLook-Ahead DoubleSeparation reactions.
"model 1.0 1.0 1.0 It is interesting to note from Table V that a change in
CROFF "fit 0.973 1.113 0.967 look-ahead time, t l , has a much larger effect on k cdr than
Accuracy 97.24% 89.82 96.59 an equivalent change to the separation minimum, D sep . This
is because the MVP CR algorithm used in this work resolved
"model 1.0 1.0 1.0
conflicts with minimum path deviations, resulting in low k
CRON "fit 1.216 1.250 1.303
for practical values of D and t . On the other hand, t ha
cr
s
Accuracy 82.27% 79.99% 76.75% sep l l
a direct and proportional influence on CD, and thus also on
k , see Eq. 22. Thus, for the CD and CR algorithms used in
experiment, for which the analysis time is 24 times larger cd
this study, CD has a greater influence on stability than CR.
than the look-ahead time. This also explains why the ‘Half
Look-Ahead’ experiment shows no significant differences to F. Airspace Capacity
the ’Baseline’ experiment in terms of C , see Fig. 9.
totalnr The final dependent variable to be considered is airspace
capacity. Airspace capacity, (cid:26) , is determined for the semi-
max
C. Total Number of Aircraft with and without Conflict Reso- empirical capacity measurement method by determining the
lution density at which the Domino Effect Parameter (DEP) model
of Eq. 34 tends to infinity. For the analytical model, (cid:26) can
Results for the total number of aircraft simulated during max
be computed using Eq. 36. Fig. 12 displays the DEP results
the 1hr logging/analysis period are displayed in Fig. 10 for
and the accuracy of the analytical capacity model for all three
the ‘Baseline’ simulation condition. Results for the other
experiment conditions.
two conditions are similar, but are not shown because the
Figs12aand12bindicatethattheanalyticalmodelestimates
corresponding model is not dependent on CD&R parameters,
(cid:26) withhighaccuracyforthe‘Baseline’and‘Look-Ahead’
see Eq. 13. The figure shows that Eq. 13 is very accurate max
experiments. However the capacity accuracy for the ‘Double-
in predicting the total number of aircraft for the cases with
Separation’ experiment is very low, with the model underesti-
and without CR. Therefore, the first assumption used in the
mating(cid:26) byalmost53%.Asforthelocalconflictratewith
derivation of C , which is the total number of conflicts max
w de i n th si C tie R s , a t n h d at e N x t p o to t e a t r a l i w m lw r r en (cid:25) t c N on to d t i a t l i n o r n , s. is valid for all considered C is R d , u t e he to low the ac b c r u e r a a k c d y ow fo n r t o h f e t ‘ h D e ou r c b n le r S (cid:25) ep r a c r w at r io a n s ’ su ex m p p e t r i i o m n en at t
highertrafficdensities.Forinstance,ifamodelfitisperformed
forsimulationdensitieslessthan11.7aircraftper10,000NM2,
D. Local Conflict Rate With and Without Conflict Resolution i.e., for densities on the left side of the blue dashed line in
Fig. 12c, where the local conflict rate assumption holds, then
The results for the local conflict rate per unit distance
the accuracy for ‘Double Separation’ is 94.61%.
with and without CR, r and r , are pictured in Fig. 11.
cwr cnr
The corresponding model is given by Eq. 14, and the model G. Results Analysis and Discussion
accuracy results are listed separately for the CR OFF and CR
From the above results, the following effects were observed:
ON cases in Table IV.
The results show that the analytical model is very accurate Model accuracy without CR is affected by look-ahead time
in predicting the local conflict rate without CR (CR OFF), The model accuracy without Conflict Resolution (CR) was
r , for all three experiment conditions. However Table IV reduced when the look-ahead time was changed from its
sh cn o r ws this is not true for the case with CR (CR ON), for baseline value. This could be caused by differences in the
whichthelowestaccuracyisfoundforthe‘DoubleSeparation’ definitions used for Conflict Detection (CD) by the model and
experiment. in the simulation. In the model, a conflict is defined to occur
An important assumption used in the derivation by both at time t cpa when the minimum distance point between two
the analytical and semi-empirical models, is that r (cid:25)r . conflicting aircraft falls within a rectangular ‘conflict search
However, Fig. 11 shows that this assumption is cn o r nly c tr w u r e area’, see Fig. 2. However, in the simulation, the first moment
at relatively ‘low’ densities. For instance, if the model for
TABLEV
r is fitted to the simulation data for densities up to 11.7
ai c r w c r raft per 10,000 NM2, i.e., for densities on the left side ACCURACYOFTHEEXTRADISTANCESEARCHEDMODEL
of the blue dashed line in Fig. 11c, then the accuracy for
Baseline HalfLook-Ahead DoubleSeparation
the ‘Double Separation’ experiment would equal 89.66%.
Therefore, the low overall accuracy for r can be attributed
kcdr Model[NM] 46.68 23.78 47.55
to the breakdown of the aforementioned
cw
a
r
ssumption at high
kcdr SimAverage[NM] 46.50 23.63 47.20
Accuracy 99.61% 99.41% 99.24%
densities. An explanation for this is given in section V-G.

--- Page 10 ---

(a)BaselineExperiment (b)HalfLook-AheadExperiment (c)DoubleSeparationExperiment
Fig.11. Localconflictrateperunitdistanceandperflight,withandwithoutCR.ExperimentconditionsaredescribedinTableIII.Modelaccuracyresultsare
listedinTableIV.Scatter:simulationdata;Curve:LSFtoEq.14.
(a)BaselineExperiment (b)HalfLook-AheadExperiment (c)DoubleSeparationExperiment
Fig.12. DominoEffectParameter(DEP)andcapacityestimate.ExperimentconditionsaredescribedinTableIII.Scatter:simulationdata;curve:LSFtoEq.34.
ofconflictdetectionoccursattimet whentheseparation
inconf
requirements are about to be violated. Conflicts are detected
in the simulation earlier than for the approach used by the
model,seeFig.13.Asthedifferencebetweent andt
cpa inconf
increases for shallow conflict angles, it is hypothesized that a
trapezoidal conflict search area needs to be used to improve
model accuracy. This hypothesis will be investigated in future
research.
The local conflict rate is dependent on conflict resolution
One of the main assumptions used by the current analytical
model, and by the previous semi-empirical method, is that
the local conflict rate per unit distance with and without
CR are equal. The current results, however, indicate that this
assumption is not entirely valid, and CR increased the local
Fig.13. Differencebetweentcpa,thetimetoClosePointofApproach(CPA),
conflict rate at higher densities. This in turn reduced the
andtinconf ,thefirstmomentofapredictedlossofseparation
accuracy of the capacity model for the ‘Double Separation’
the rate of growth of the measured DEP, which in turn leads
experiment.
to a higher capacity estimate when fitting the DEP model to
An explanation for the breakdown of this assumption at the simulation data compared the analytical model.
high densities can be found by comparing the traffic density Thus, the local conflict rates with and without CR are not
contours for the three experiment conditions, see Fig. 14. equal at high densities due to the strong traffic ‘dispersion’
This figure shows that CR had no significant effect on the effect caused by conflict chain reactions. To improve the
density distribution for the ‘Baseline’ and ‘Half Look-Ahead’ accuracy of the model at high densities/separation require-
experiments. On the other hand, for the Double Separation’ ments,thiseffectneedstobetakenintoaccount.Furthermore,
experiment, conflict resolution led to fewer density hot-spots. simulations used to validate such models should be designed
Thisisbecausedoublingtheseparationrequirementimplicitly such that aircraft are not prematurely deleted when they are
quadruples the traffic density when considering amount of ’bounced’ out of the simulation sector as a result of CR
airspace occupied by each aircraft, for the same number of maneuvers. Instead, the distance-to-destination can be used to
instantaneous aircraft as for the other two experiments. This avoid premature deletion of aircraft.
implicit increase in density leads to an increase in conflicts,
and conflict chain reactions. For voltage-potential based CR Model can be used to understand the factors influencing
algorithms,theconsequentincreaseinthenumberofresolution capacity
maneuversathighdensitiesleadstoa‘spreading-out’oftraffic. Despitethelimitationsdiscussedabove,thecurrentformofthe
Near the edges of the simulation area, aircraft are therefore analyticalmodelcanbeusedtodetermineafirstordercapacity
‘bounced’ out of the experiment, at which point they are estimatewhenreducedseparationrequirementscanbeused,as
deleted. The resulting pre-mature deletion of aircraft reduces would be the case for future urban air transportation systems.

--- Page 11 ---

decentralization, and provides insights on the effect of
different airspace and CD&R parameters on capacity.
(cid:15) Thescopeandaccuracyofthemodelcanbeincreasedby
taking into account the effect of conflict chain reactions
on the local, or per aircraft, conflict rate. This will be
consideredinfutureresearch,aswillextendingthemodel
for three-dimensional airspace.
REFERENCES
[1] J.M.Hoekstra,R.N.H.W.vanGent,andR.C.J.Ruigrok,“Designing
for safety: the free flight air traffic management concept,” Reliability
Engineering&SystemSafety,vol.75,no.2,pp.215–232,Feb.2002.
[2] J. M. Hoekstra, R. C. J. Ruigrok, and R. N. H. W. van Gent, “Free
FlightinaCrowdedAirspace?”inProceedingsofthe3rdUSA/Europe
AirTrafficManagementR&DSeminar,Naples,Jun.2000.
[3] M. Ballin, J. Hoekstra, D. Wing, and G. Lohr, “NASA Langley and
NLRResearchofDistributedAir/GroundTrafficManagement,”inAIAA
Aircraft Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) Conference,
AIAA-2002-5826. AmericanInstituteofAeronauticsandAstronautics,
2002.
[4] J. K. Kuchar and L. C. Yang, “A Review of Conflict Detection and
ResolutionModelingMethods,”IEEETransactionsonIntelligentTrans-
portationSystems,vol.1,pp.179–189,2000.
[5] J.Krozel,M.Peters,andK.Bilimoria,“Adecentralizedcontrolstrategy
for distributed air/ground traffic separation,” in AIAA Guidance, Nav-
Fig. 14. Traffic density contour for the three experiment conditions at the igation, and Control Conference and Exhibit. American Institute of
sametimeinstantofarepresentativerepetitionofthehighesttrafficdemand, AeronauticsandAstronautics,2000.
withandwithoutCR [6] K.Bilimoria,K.Sheth,H.Lee,andS.Grabbe,“Performanceevaluation
of airborne separation assurance for free flight,” in AIAA Guidance,
Furthermore, the model can be used to understand the factors NavigationandControlConference,AIAA-2000-4269,2000.
[7] M. R. Jardin, “Analytical Relationships Between Conflict Counts and
that affect airspace capacity for decentralization. For instance,
Air-Traffic Density,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics,
the model predicted, and the simulation proved, that ‘state- vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1150–1156, 2005. [Online]. Available: http:
based’ CD had a greater effect on stability, and consequently //dx.doi.org/10.2514/1.12758
[8] E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek, J. Hoekstra, A. Vidosavljevic, M. Arntzen,
onairspacecapacity,thantheMVPCRalgorithm.Sincestate-
F.Bussink,andD.Nieuwenhuisen,“AnalysisofAirspaceStructureand
basedCDisinfluencedbythelook-aheadtime,anoptimization Capacity for Decentralized Separation Using Fast-Time Simulations,”
of look-ahead time with traffic density could be performed JournalofGuidance,Control,andDynamics,vol.40,no.1,pp.38–51,
2017.[Online].Available:http://dx.doi.org/10.2514/1.G000528
to maximize capacity. In this way, the model can be used to
[9] Hoekstra, J., Maas, J., Tra, M., and Sunil, E., “How Do Layered
selectasubsetoftheavailableairspacedesign-spaceforfurther Airspace Design Parameters Affect Airspace Capacity and Safety?” in
investigation using fast-time simulations. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Research in Air
Transportation,Jun.2016.
Theoretical vs. practical capacity [10] J. Ellerbroek, “Airborne Conflict Resolution in Three Dimensions,”
Ph.D.dissertation,DelftUniversityofTechnology,FacultyofAerospace
While the models addressed here focus on the theoretical
Engineering, Sep. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://resolver.tudelft.nl/
capacitylimitofdirect-routingdecentralizedairspace,inprac- uuid:96c65674-06d4-410c-87c2-b981af95211e
tice, society will not accept an asymptotic limit of airspace [11] J. Hoekstra and J. Ellerbroek, “BlueSky ATC Simulator Project: an
Open Data and Open Source Approach,” in Proceedings of the 7th
stabilityasanindicationoftheachievablecapacity.Moreover,
InternationalConferenceonResearchinAirTransportation,Jun.2016.
airline economics, which is primarily focused on improving [12] T. Langejan, E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek, and J. Hoekstra, “Effect of ADS-
efficiency, and stochastic elements, such as weather, affect B Characteristics on Airborne Conflict Detection and Resolution,” in
Proccedingsofthe6thSesarInnovationDays,2016.
the practical airspace capacity. Nevertheless, determining the
theoretical capacity limit is useful as a metric for comparing AUTHORBIOGRAPHIES
different forms of decentralization and/or CD&R algorithms. Emmanuel Sunil received the MSc degree in Aerospace Engi-
neering(cumlaude)fromTUDelftin2014,forhisworkonahaptic
interface for unmanned aircraft collision avoidance. He is currently
VI. CONCLUSIONSANDRECOMMENDATIONS
a PhD candidate at the faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft.
His work focuses on airspace design and capacity modeling.
In this study, an analytical capacity model was derived for
Joost Ellerbroek received the M.Sc. (2007) and Ph.D. (2013)
a decentralized direct-routing airspace concept for motion in degrees in aerospace engineering from the Delft University of Tech-
the horizontal plane. This model is an extension of a semi- nology, The Netherlands, with the Control and Simulation section,
empirical method reported in literature. Fast-time simulation whereheiscurrentlyworkingasanAssistantProfessor.Hisresearch
experimentswereconductedtovalidatethederivedmodeland interestslieinthefieldofAirTrafficManagement,andincludetopics
suchastheanalysisofairspacecomplexityandcapacity,datascience
its components. The following conclusions can be drawn:
in ATM, the design and analysis of conflict detection and resolution
(cid:15) The theoretical capacity limit of decentralized airspace algorithms, and human-automation interaction.
can be defined as the density at which the Domino Jacco Hoekstra obtained his MSc, PhD and private pilot license
from TU Delft. He has worked at the Dutch National Aerospace
Effect Parameter (DEP) , a measure of airspace stability,
Laboratory(NLR)for16years,andhasco-operatedwithNASA,the
approaches infinity. At this density, all aircraft in the FAA and many European organizations. He founded the Association
airspace exist in a state of conflict due to conflict chain for Scientific Development of ATM, was the founding director of
reactions. AT-One and was the head of NLR’s Air Transport Division. After
(cid:15) Simulation results showed that the model accurately pre- serving two terms as dean of the Aerospace Engineering faculty of
TU Delft, he is now a full professor at this faculty, and holds the
dicts the extra distance searched for conflicts due to
chair in CNS/ATM. His research topics include 4D trajectory based
conflict resolution maneuvers. Therefore, the model can ATM, airborne separation assurance and controller-pilot data link
be used to understand the effect of Conflict Detection communication. Next to research, he teaches courses on CNS/ATM,
and Resolution (CD&R) parameters on conflict chain programming in Python and aeronautics.
reactions and airspace stability. Jerom Maas received the MSc degree in Aerospace Engineering
from TU Delft in 2015, for his work on augmenting swarming logic
(cid:15) For the conflict detection and conflict resolution algo-
toavoltagepotential-basedairborneconflictresolutionalgorithm.He
rithms considered in this study, conflict detection had iscurrentlyaPhDcandidateatthefacultyofAerospaceEngineering,
greater impact on airspace stability. TUDelft,whereheisdevelopinganobstacledetectionradarsystem
(cid:15) The accuracy of derived analytical capacity model is to aid general aviation pilots with VFR tasks.
sufficient to gain a first order estimate of capacity for