

--- Page 1 ---

Delft University of Technology
Modeling the Intrinsic Safety of Unstructured and Layered Airspace Designs
Tra, Martijn; Sunil, Emmanuel; Ellerbroek, Joost; Hoekstra, Jacco; Maas, Jerom
Publication date
2017
Document Version
Final published version
Published in
12th Seminar Papers
Citation (APA)
Tra, M., Sunil, E., Ellerbroek, J., Hoekstra, J., & Maas, J. (2017). Modeling the Intrinsic Safety of
Unstructured and Layered Airspace Designs. In 12th Seminar Papers: 12th USA/Europe Air Traffic
Management Research and Development Seminar
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10.

--- Page 2 ---

Twelfth USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and Development Seminar (ATM2017)
Modeling the Intrinsic Safety of Unstructured
and Layered Airspace Designs
Martijn Tra, Emmanuel Sunil, Joost Ellerbroek and Jacco Hoekstra
Control and Simulation, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering
Delft University of Technology (TU Delft)
Delft, The Netherlands
Abstract—Previous research relating airspace structure and ca- To model the intrinsic safety benefits of layered airspace,
pacity has shown that a decentralized layered airspace concept, the understanding gained from the Metropolis project was
in which each altitude band limited horizontal travel to within used to develop probabilistic conflict rate models for level
a predefined heading range, improved safety when compared to
flying aircraft [10]. In this paper, conflict rate models for
unstructured airspace. However, the extent of the safety benefits
ofsuchlayeredairspacedesignswerenotquantified.Tothisend, bothunstructuredandlayeredairspacedesignsareextendedto
inthispaper,conflictratemodelsaredevelopedtodeterminethe take into account conflicts between aircraft in different flight
intrinsic safety of unstructured and layered airspace designs. In phases,i.e,conflictsbetweenpairsofcruisingaircraft,between
comparison to previous work, the present models consider con- cruising and climbing/descending aircraft, and between pairs
flictsbetweenaircraftindifferentflightphases.Thus,conflictsfor
of climbing/descending aircraft, are treated to determine the
climbing and descending traffic, as well as for cruising aircraft,
are taken into account when computing the total conflict rate. overall conflict rate.
Tovalidatethemodels,fast-timesimulationswereperformedfor The derived models are tested using three fast-time sim-
several different layered airspace concepts, and for unstructured ulation experiments. The first experiment focused on testing
airspace.Theresultsindicatethatthemodelsareabletoestimate the conflict rate models for unstructured and layered airspace
theconflictrateforhightrafficdensitiesusingamodelfitforlow
designs under ideal conditions, and investigated the effect of
densities.Whencomparingthedifferentlayeredairspaceconcepts
tested,themodelpredicted,andthesimulationresultsconfirmed, heading range per altitude layer on safety. The second and
a clear safety improvement when the permitted heading range third experiments considered the effect of variations in flight
per altitude band is reduced. Thus the models can be used to path angle and airspeed, respectively, on conflict rate.
study the effect of airspace design parameters on the safety of Thispaperbeginswithanoverviewofthepreviousresearch
unstructured and layered airspace concepts.
onconflictratemodelingforunstructuredandlayeredairspace
Keywords—airspacesafety;conflictratemodel;conflictproba- designs in section II. Next, in section III, the conflict models
bility; unstructured airspace; layered airspace; Free-Flight; are extended to take into account climbing and descending
airspace capacity; airspace structure; self-separation; BlueSky
traffic. This is followed with the design of simulation exper-
ATM simulator
iments used to validate the models in section IV. The results
of these simulations are presented and discussed in section V.
I. INTRODUCTION
The paper ends with a summary of the main conclusions.
Air traffic demand has been growing rapidly in many II. PREVIOUSRESEARCH
parts of the world over the last decade, and this growth is
Conflicts are defined as predicted losses of separation, and
expected to continue. The increased demand has stressed the
conflict rate is defined as the number of conflicts per unit
current ‘centralized’ Air Traffic Management (ATM) system
time. The conflict rate without conflict resolution can be
to near saturation levels [1], [2]. To keep pace with demand,
used to measure the intrinsic safety of an airspace design
manystudieshavesuggestedsomedegreeof‘decentralization’
concept, i.e., to measure the ability of an airspace concept
of traffic separation responsibilities, from ground based air
to prevent conflicts from occurring. This section describes the
traffic controllers to each individual aircraft, to increase en
conceptualdesignofthe‘Layers’airspacedesignconcept,and
route airspace capacity [3]–[5]. To support decentralization,
also discusses previous work on modeling conflict rate for
numerousairborneConflictDetectionandResolution(CD&R)
unstructured and layered airspace.
algorithms [6], and accompanying display interfaces [3], [7],
have been developed. A. The Layers Airspace Design Concept
WhileCD&Ralgorithmsarenecessarytoimplementdecen- Several different layered airspace designs have been dis-
tralization, results from the Metropolis project have indicated cussedinliterature[11]–[13].Theconceptunderconsideration
thatthestructuringoftrafficalsoplaysanimportantroleonthe in this work was developed in the Metropolis project [8], [9],
capacity of decentralized airspace [8], [9]. In that study, four and is known as the ‘Layers’ concept.
airspace concepts of increasing structure were compared. The The Layers concept was developed as an extension to
results showed that a decentralized layered airspace concept, the hemispheric/semicircular rule [14]. It uses a vertical seg-
in which a vertical segmentation of airspace was used to mentation of airspace to separate traffic with different travel
separate traffic with different travel direction at different flight directions at different flight levels. This is achieved using so
levels, led to the highest capacity when compared to other called ‘heading-altitude’ rules which describe the headings
conceptsthatconstrainedthehorizontalmotionofaircraft.The permitted per altitude band. Consequently, operators have the
increased capacity for ‘layers’ was found to be a result of the freedom to select their preferred horizontal trajectories and
reduction in relative velocities between aircraft cruising at the airspeed.Climbinganddescendingaircraftareexemptedfrom
same altitude, which in turn improved safety when compared the heading-altitude rules, and can violate them to reach their
to completely unstructured airspace. cruising altitude or destination.

--- Page 3 ---

dimensionalairspace,A canbeapproximatedasarectangular
c
‘conflict search area’ that is defined by t , the horizontal
l
FL 127 315o - 360o separation minimum, d , and the average aircraft velocity,
seph
v, see Fig. 2. Since conflicts are detected if the Closest Point
FL 116 270o - 315o
of Approach (CPA) of an intruder aircraft is located in A , p
c 2
FL 105 225o - 270o is defined as [15]:
FL 94 180o - 225o p = A cp = 2 d seph (cid:1)v(cid:1)t l (cid:1)p (2)
2 A s A s
FL 83 135o - 180o
Here, p is the effect of airspace structure on instantaneous
s
FL 72 90o - 135o conflict probability, and it can be thought of as a scaling
factor to the A =A term in the above expression. Since
FL 61 45o - 90o c
there are no limitations on aircraft trajectories in unstructured
airspace, there are also no procedural mechanisms to prevent
FL 50 0o - 45o
conflicts from occurring. Therefore, this kind of structure has
no beneficial effect of on conflict probability and p = 1 for
s
Fig.1. SchematicviewofanexampleLayersconceptwithanallowedheading two dimensional unstructured airspace, i.e., there is no scaling
range of 45o per flight level. The airspace volume and Flight Levels (FL) oftheA =Atermforunstructuredairspace.SubstitutingEq.2
c
picturedarealsousedinthefast-timesimulationsperformedinthisstudy.
in Eq. 1 yields the following expression for the conflict rate
An example Layers topology is shown in Fig. 1. An im- of unstructured airspace in the horizontal plane (2D):
portant design requirement for the Layers concept is that the
d (cid:1)v(cid:1)t
spacing between altitude bands is at least equal to the vertical C =N (N (cid:0)1)(cid:1) seph l (3)
separationminimumtopreventconflictsbetweenaircraftcruis- ssua;2D ss ss A
ing in adjacent flight levels. In this work, a vertical separation
ofa1000ftisused.Therefore,thealtitudebandsfortheLayers
C. Modeling Conflict Rate for Cruising Aircraft in Layered
concepts considered here are separated by 1100ft.
Airspace
One complete set of layers is needed to specify all possible
travel directions. Thus, eight altitude bands are needed to In our previous work, a conflict rate model for the Layers
define one complete layer set when an allowed heading range concept has been derived for cruising aircraft [10]. This was
of 45o per flight level is used, as shown in Fig. 1. When done by extending the conflict rate model for unstructured
multiple sets of layers are available, the total flight distance is airspace with the two aspects that differentiate layered and
usedtodeterminethecruisingaltitudeofanaircraft,i.e.,short unstructured airspace: the reduction of the number of possible
flights use lower layer sets, and longer flights use higher layer conflict pairs, and the reduction of relative velocity between
sets.Thiscanbeusedtominimizetheeffectofpredetermined cruising aircraft. Below, a summary of these two aspects, and
altitudes on efficiency. theresultantconflictratemodelforLayers,isgiven.Thereader
is referred to [10] for the complete derivation.
B. Modeling Conflict Rate for Unstructured Airspace in 2D
1) Conflict Pair Reduction
Unlike Layers, in unstructured airspace, no constraints are
Since the spacing between the predefined flight levels of the
imposedonaircrafttrajectories.Thus,aircraftarefreetoselect
Layers concept is at least equal to the vertical separation
theirpreferredaltitudes,flightpathsandspeedsinunstructured
minimum, cruising aircraft at different altitude bands can not
airspace.
conflictwitheachother.Therefore,theLayersconceptreduces
As aircraft move independently of each other without con-
thenumberofpossibleconflictpairsbetweencruisingaircraft,
flict resolution, the conflict rate for unstructured airspace,
and the corresponding conflict rate for a particular altitude
C , has been modeled in literature as the expected value
ssua layer can be expressed as:
of a binomial random variable model that is summed over all
aircraft in the airspace [4], [15]: N (N (cid:0)1)
C = sslayi sslayi (cid:1)p (4)
sslayi 2 2layi
1 ∑Nss N (N (cid:0)1) Here, the subscript lay indicates that the variables are for
C = (N (cid:0)1)p = ss ss p (1) i
ssua 2 ss 2 2 2 one specific layer. The expected total number of conflicts at a
i=1 given moment in time in the entire airspace can be computed
Here, N is the steady-state number of aircraft, and p is by summing Eq.4 over all altitude bands:
ss 2
theinstantaneousconflictprobabilitybetweenanytwoaircraft.
Note that the number of conflicts is divided by 2 in the above
expression so that conflicts between the same two aircraft are
not counted twice at a given moment in time.
To model p it is necessary to take into account the method
2
used for Conflict Detection (CD). In most studies, CD is
performed through linear extrapolation of aircraft positions
over a predefined ‘look-ahead’ time, t . For such CD in two
l
dimensional airspace, [15] proposed that p can be computed
2 Fig. 2. Area searched for conflicts, Ac. Here A is the total airspace area
by comparing the area searched for conflicts by an aircraft, underconsideration.AconflictoccursiftheClosestPointofApproach(CPA)
A
c
, to the total airspace area under consideration, A. For two ofanintruderaircraftisinsideAc.

--- Page 4 ---

∑L N (N (cid:0)1)
C = sslayi sslayi (cid:1)p (5)
sslay;2D 2 2layi
i=1
Here, L is the number of altitude layers. If traffic is assumed
to be evenly distributed over all (predefined) flight levels,
thenN =N =L.Furthermore,theinstantaneousconflict
probabi
s
l
s
i
l
t
a
y
yi
betwee
ss
nanytwoaircraftinalayer,p ,isequal
2layi
for all layers. Therefore, this term can be generalized to the
instantaneousconflictprobabilityp foralllayers.Usingthese
2
assumptions, Eq. 5 can be simplified to:
( )
C = N ss N L ss (cid:0)1 p (6) F be ig tw . e 4 e . n T tw h o e u p n ro if b o a r b m il l i y ty di d s e tr n i s b i u ty ted fu h n e c a ti d o i n ng o s f b t e h t e we a e b n so 0 lu a te nd he (cid:11) ad is in t g ria d n if g f u e l r a e r nc in e
sslay;2D 2 2 shape[10].
When comparing Eqs. 1 and 6, it can be seen that the first conflict probability, p , can be calculated by integrating the
s
way in which the Layers concept reduces the conflict rate product of Eqs. 7 and 8 for the range of heading differences
over unstructured airspace is by decreasing the number of two between two aircraft in a layer:
aircraft combinations that can conflict with each other.
∫
2) Relative Velocity Reduction 1 (cid:11)
p = P(j∆hdg =xj)(cid:1)v (j∆hdg =xj)dx (9)
As aircraft in the Layers concept are ‘sorted’ into different s v rel
0
altitude bands based on their heading, the relative velocities
The above equation is divided by v so that the resulting p
betweencruisingaircraftataparticularflightlevelarelowered. s
is dimensionless. Finally, the conflict rate for two dimensional
Therefore, the effect of a layered airspace structure on the
layered airspace can be determined by substituting Eq. 9 into
instantaneousconflictprobabilitybetweentwoaircraft,p ,can
s
Eq. 2, and then substituting the result into Eq. 6:
be modeled by considering the effect of a predefined heading
range on the relative velocities between traffic in a particular ( ) ( )
altitude layer [10], see Fig. 3. N d (cid:1)v(cid:1)t 2(cid:25) 2 (cid:11)
C =N ss (cid:0)1 (cid:1) seph l(cid:1) 1(cid:0) sin
For the conflict situation shown in Fig. 3, the relative sslay;2D ss L A (cid:11) (cid:11) 2
velocity, v rel , can be computed as a function of the absolute (10)
heading difference, j∆hdgj, between the two aircraft:
( ) III. CONFLICTRATEMODELSWITHCLIMBINGAND
j∆hdgj DESCENDINGTRAFFIC
v (j∆hdgj)=2 vsin (7)
rel 2 For a given airspace volume, climbing and descending
aircraft will affect the total number of conflicts. Therefore
Here, it is assumed that all aircraft in a layer have the same
in this section, the conflict rate models for unstructured and
true airspeed, v, and fly in the same altitude layer. The
layered airspace designs are extended to take into account the
allowed heading range per layer, (cid:11), is the also the maximum
effect of climbing and descending aircraft.
heading difference between any two aircraft cruising in the
same altitude band. If the headings of all aircraft in a layer A. Modeling the Effect of Conflict Detection on Conflict
are uniformly distributed within the heading range (cid:11), then the Probability in 3D
probability density function of the heading difference between
For motion restricted to the horizontal plane, the instan-
two aircraft has a triangular shape, see Fig. 4, and can be
taneous conflict probability, p , was shown to be dependent
2
described as:
on the area searched for conflicts, A , and the total airspace
c
( )
2 x 2 area under consideration, A, see Fig. 2. Analogously, for
P(j∆hdgj)= 1(cid:0) = ((cid:11)(cid:0)x) (8) three dimensional airspace, p is dependent on the volume
(cid:11) (cid:11) (cid:11)2 2
searchedforconflicts,V ,andthetotalairspacevolumeunder
c
The effect of layered airspace structure on instantaneous consideration, V:
V
p (cid:24) c (11)
2 V
Fig. 5 displays the side-view of the volume searched for
conflictsbyanaircraft,V .ItshowsthatV isdependentonthe
c c
horizontal separation minimum, d , the vertical separation
seph
minimum, d , the aircraft velocity, v, the CD look-ahead
sepv
time, t , and the flight path angle, (cid:13). The flight path angle of
l
an aircraft can be described using its horizontal and vertical
speeds, v and v :
h v
( )
v
(cid:13) =tan (cid:0)1 v (12)
v
h
Fig.3. Relationbetweenheadingdifferencebetweentwoconflictingaircraft For most practical cases, v(cid:1)t l >>d seph . Therefore, V c can
andrelativevelocity be approximated using the simplified side-view presented in

--- Page 5 ---

the bottom half of Fig. 5. Here, the distance x depends on (cid:13),
1
d and d :
seph sepv
x =2 d sin((cid:13))+2 d cos((cid:13)) (13)
1 seph sepv
As the vertical speed, v , is usually smaller than the hori-
v
zontal speed, v , the flight path angle will also be relatively
h
small. For small (cid:13), the following assumptions can be used to
simplify the above model:
2 d sin((cid:13)) = 2 d (cid:13) (14a)
seph seph
2 d cos((cid:13)) = 2 d (14b)
sepv sepv
Using the above simplifications, V can be formulated as:
c Fig. 5. Side-view of the volume searched for conflicts by an aircraft in a
three-dimensional airspace. The top figure indicates the dependency on the
V =2 d v t x airspaceparameters,andthebottomfigurerepresentsthesimplificationusing
V
c
=2 d
seph
v t
l
(2
1
d j(cid:13)j+2 d )
(15) v(cid:1)t>>dseph .
c seph l seph sepv
1) Cruising vs. Cruising
CombiningEqs.15and.11resultsinthefollowingrelationfor
2) Cruising vs. Climbing/Descending
p forthreedimensionalairspace.Thisrelationwillbeusedto
2 3) Climbing/Descending vs. Climbing/Descending
model the conflict rates for unstructured and layered airspace
designs. The overall conflict rate for the Layers concept for three-
dimensional can be modeled as a summation of the conflict
2 d v t (2 d j(cid:13)j+2 d ) rates of the different conflict types listed above:
p (cid:24) seph l seph sepv (16)
2 V
B. ModelingtheTotalConflictRateforUnstructuredAirspace C = N cruise (Ncr L uise (cid:0)1) (cid:1) 2 d seph (cid:1)v(cid:1)t l (cid:1)g((cid:11))(cid:1)k
As mentioned earlier, for unstructured airspace, there is sslay;3D 2 A 1
no a priori separation of traffic or prevention of conflicts.
+N (cid:1)N (cid:1)f(j(cid:13)j )(cid:1)k
Consequently, the instantaneous conflict probability, p , is cruise CD avg 2
2
independent of aircraft flight phase, and it is not necessary to N (N (cid:0)1)
considerdifferencesbetweencruisingandclimbing/descending + CD 2 CD (cid:1)f(j(cid:13)j)(cid:1)k 3
aircraft.Therefore,thetwo-dimensionalconflictratemodelfor (19)
unstructured airspace can be extended to three dimensions by
simply using the 3D version of p , i.e., by substituting Eq. 16 Here, g((cid:11)) and f((cid:13)) are defined as:
2
into Eq. 1: ( )
2(cid:25) 2 (cid:11)
C = N ss (N ss (cid:0)1) (cid:1)f(j(cid:13)j )(cid:1)k (17) g((cid:11))= (cid:11) 1(cid:0) (cid:11) sin 2 (20)
ssua;3D 2 avg
2 d v t (2 d j(cid:13)j+2 d )
where f(j(cid:13)j ) is defined using Eq. 16: f((cid:13))= seph l seph sepv (21)
avg V
2 d v t (2 d j(cid:13)j +2 d ) In the above equations, j(cid:13)j is the absolute flight path
f(j(cid:13)j avg )= seph l sep V h avg sepv (18) angle of climbing/descending aircraft, j(cid:13)j avg is the average
absoluteflightpathangleofallaircraftintheairspace,N
cruise
Here, j(cid:13)j avg is the average absolute flight path angle of all is the instantaneous number of cruising aircraft, and N CD
aircraft in the airspace, and k is a constant term introduced to is the instantaneous number of climbing/descending aircraft.
account for any non-modeled aspects that may influence the Note that the second term on the right hand side of Eq. 19
conflictrate.Thevalueofk isdeterminedbyfittingthemodel considers combinations of cruising and climbing/descending
to the simulation results in a least-square sense. If k = 1, aircraft. Since a particular aircraft can not be cruising and
then the model as defined above is able to predict the conflict climbing/descending at the same time, it is not required to
rate accurately. On the other hand, if k < 1, the model is divide this term by 2. Also note that k-constants have been
over-estimatingtheconflictrate,andifk >1,modelisunder- introduced into Eq. 19. As for unstructured airspace, these
estimating the conflict rate. Thus, the value of k can be used constants are used to to determine the accuracy of the three
to determine the accuracy of the model. components of the model when it is fitted to data from
simulation experiments.
C. Modeling the Total Conflict Rate for Layered Airspace
The structure of the Layers concept prevents conflicts be- IV. FAST-TIMESIMULATIONDESIGN
tween aircraft cruising at different altitude bands. However,
there are no procedural mechanisms in Layers to separate To validate the conflict rate models derived for three-
climbing and descending traffic from cruising aircraft. There- dimensional airspace, three fast-time simulation experiments
fore, the total conflict rate for Layers can be modeled by were performed for unstructured and layered airspace designs.
splittingthenumberofinstantaneousconflictsintothreetypes: This section describes the design of these experiments.

--- Page 6 ---

A. Simulation Development TABLEI
EXPERIMENTAIRSPACECONCEPTS
1) Simulation Platform
The BlueSky open-source ATM simulator was used as the
Heading Range Number of
simulation platform in this research. It was developed at Symbol Name
Per Layer, (cid:11) Layer Sets
the Delft University of Technology (TU Delft) using the
UA Unstructured Airspace - -
Python programming language1. BlueSky has numerous fea- L360 Layers 360 360o 8
tures including the ability to simulate more than 5000 aircraft L180 Layers 180 180o 4
simultaneouslywithCD&R.FormoreinformationonBlueSky, L90 Layers 90 90o 2
the reader is referred to [16]. L45 Layers 45 45o 1
2) Conflict Detection
Conflicts were detected using the so called ‘state-based’ Con-
4
flict Detection (CD) method. In this CD method, conflicts are
3
detected if separation violations are predicted when aircraft
2
positions are linearly extrapolated over a predefined ‘look-
1
ahead’time.Inthisstudy,a‘look-ahead’timeof5minutes,as
0
wellasseparationrequirementsof5nauticalmileshorizontally
−1
and 1000 ft vertically, were used.
−2
3) Airspace Concepts and Concept Implementation −3
Four different layered airspace concepts and an unstructured −4
−4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4
airspaceconceptwereusedinthefast-timesimulations.TableI longitude (decimal degrees)
displays the properties of these concepts. Additionally, all
concepts were defined between FL50 and FL127, see Fig. 1.
This figure also shows the altitudes of the eight flight levels
used by all layered airspace concepts. The altitude bands for
layeredconceptsareseparatedby1100ft.Incombinationwith
averticalseparationrequirementof1000ft,theadditional100
ftseparationbetweenaltitudebandsguaranteesthataircraftdo
not trigger conflicts with traffic cruising in adjacent layers. It
shouldalsobenotedthattheonlydifferencebetweentheL360
and UA concepts is the use of predefined cruising altitudes in
L360.
The airspace concepts were implemented into BlueSky by
modifying its trajectory planning functions. Aircraft in both
unstructured and layered airspace concepts used the direct
horizontal route. For unstructured airspace, altitude was lin-
earlydependentonthedistancebetweenoriginanddestination.
Since traffic scenarios with a uniform distribution of flight
distances were used, this form of altitude selection resulted
in a uniform vertical distribution of traffic, i.e., altitude was
proportional to flight distance.
On the other hand, altitude for the Layers concept was
selected based on the bearing to the destination and the
matching flight level from a predefined list, i.e, by using the
‘heading-altitude’ruleforeachlayeredairspaceconcept.When
multiple sets of layers were available, the total flight distance
was used to determine the cruising altitude of an aircraft:
short flights used lower layer sets, while longer flights used
higher layer sets. Because traffic scenarios with a uniform
distribution of trip distances were used, traffic was distributed
uniformly over the eight predefined flight levels used by all
layered concepts.
B. Traffic Scenarios
1) Testing Region and Flight Profiles
A large square region of 480 (cid:2) 480 nautical miles was used
as the physical environment for the traffic simulations. A total
of289airportswereevenlydistributedinagridpatterninthis
region, with a spacing of 30 n miles (similar to the spacing
between airports in Europe including small ones).
1BlueSkycanbedownloadedfromhttps://github.com/ProfHoekstra/bluesky
)seerged
lamiced(
edutital
126
65
4
2mn000.01/CA
Fig.6. Densitydistributionforarepresentativetrafficscenario.Tocompensate
for the reduced densities near the edge of the simulation area, a smaller
experimentareawasdefinedbetween-2o and2o latitudeandlongitude.
Pilot simulations revealed that traffic densities near the
edges of the ‘simulation volume’ were much lower than in
its center, see Fig. 6, because origins and destinations for
all traffic were located within the simulation volume. To
compensate for this, a smaller ‘experiment volume’ of 240
x 240 n miles was defined in which traffic was more evenly
distributed in the horizontal plane. As mentioned earlier, in
theverticalplane,theexperimentvolumewasdefinedbetween
FL50andFL127.Onlyconflictsforaircraftlocatedwithinthe
experiment volume were used in the validation of the conflict
rate models.
Aircraft were spawned at 0 ft, and subsequently took off
and climbed to their assigned cruising altitudes. All aircraft
climbed and descended with the same flight path angle. At a
predetermineddistancefromtheirdestination(whichdepended
on the cruise altitude), aircraft descended to the ground. Since
the focus of this research is on en route airspace design,
aircraftweredeletedfromthesimulationwhentheydescended
through 4000 ft. Furthermore, to avoid take-off conflicts, CD
was performed for altitudes above 1000 ft.
2) Scenario Generation
A scenario generator was created to produce traffic scenarios
with a desired and constant traffic density, as well as with a
uniform distance distribution. Constant density scenarios were
requiredsothatthetotalthenumberofconflictsloggedduring
asimulationruncouldbeattributedtoaparticulardensity.Uni-
form distance distributions were required to ensure a uniform
vertical distribution of traffic, as altitude was selected based
on distance for unstructured airspace, and if multiple layer
sets were available for the Layers concept.
Since aircraft were deleted from the simulation as they
exited the sector, to realize constant density scenarios, aircraft
were introduced into the simulation at rate, ! , equal to:
ac
(cid:26) A v
! = ac (22) ac s

--- Page 7 ---

TABLEII TABLEIII
SIMULATIONPARAMETERSFORPRIMARYEXPERIMENT TRAFFICDEMANDSCENARIOS
Parameter Value Description Density3 Number of
#
A 57.6(cid:1)103 n miles2 Experiment Area [ac/10,000 NM2] Instantaneous AC3
V 1.64(cid:1)1016 ft 3 Experiment Volume 1 2.0 46.1
2 2.7 62.2
s 345 n miles Average distance
3 3.8 87.6
v 500 kts Speed of all aircraft 4 5.4 124.4
t 5 mins CD look-ahead time 5 7.6 175.1
l
d 5 n miles Horizontal separation 6 10.6 244.2
seph
7 14.8 341.0
d 1000 ft Vertical separation
sepv 8 20.7 476.9
L 8 Number of altitude layers
9 29.0 668.2
j(cid:13)j 2.8o Flight path angle of climb- 10 40.6 935.4
ing/descending aircraft 11 56.9 1311.0
j(cid:13)j avg 0.39o Averageflightpathangleofall 12 79.6 1834.0
aircraft 13 111.5 2569.0
Here,Aistheairspaceareausedforsimulation,visaverage (cid:15) 2 airspaceconceptsnamely,UnstructuredAirspace(UA)
aircraft speed, s is average flight distance, and (cid:26) is the and Layers 45 (L45), see Table I
ac
desired traffic density, defined as (cid:26) = N =A. These and (cid:15) 11 traffic demand densities ranging between 2.0 and 56.9
ac ss
other constant simulation parameters are listed in Table II. aircraft per 10,000 square nautical miles, see Table III
Using this approach, thirteen traffic demand scenarios of (cid:15) 2 flight path angle settings for climbing and descending
increasing density were defined, see Table III. Note that the traffic, namely 2.8o (standard) and 1.4o (non-standard)
values in Table III are for the total simulation area, which is Two repetitions were performed for each traffic demand sce-
larger than the experiment area. nario.Therefore,atotalof88simulationrunswereperformed
To ensure that aircraft had a minimum cruise phase during for this experiment, using a total of 103,736 flights.
their flight, the minimum distance between origin and desti-
3) Airspeed Variation Experiment
nation was selected to be 240 n miles. The maximum flight
The third and final experiment focused on the effect of
distancewassetto450nmiles.Usingthesesettings,scenarios
airspeedvariationsontheconflictrateoflayeredairspace.This
showed a uniform distribution of flight lengths.
experiment compared simulations in which all aircraft flew at
C. Independent Variables the same airspeed to simulations were airspeed was uniformly
distributed. The independent variables were:
Three separate experiments were performed. The indepen-
(cid:15) 1 airspaceconceptsnamely,Layers45(L45),seeTableI
dent variables of each experiment are discussed below.
(cid:15) 11 traffic demand densities ranging between 2.0 and 56.9
1) Primary Experiment aircraft per 10,000 square nautical miles, see Table III
The focus of the primary experiment was to validate the con- (cid:15) 2 airspeedsettings;1)airspeedof500ktsforallaircraft;
flict rate models derived for unstructured and layered airspace 2)uniformlydistributedairspeedbetween450ktsand550
concepts under ideal conditions. Additionally, this experiment kts
investigated the effect of heading range per altitude band on Two repetitions were performed for each traffic demand sce-
thesafetyofthelayersconcept.Theindependentvariablesfor nario.Therefore,atotalof44simulationrunswereperformed
this experiment were: for this experiment, using a total of 51,868 flights.
(cid:15) 5 airspace concepts, see Table I.
D. Dependent Variables
(cid:15) 13trafficdemanddensitiesrangingbetween2.0and111.5
aircraft per 10,000 square nautical miles, see Table III. Theconflictratemodelsderivedforunstructuredandlayered
Note that this relates to a current en route density2 [17] airspace concepts, described by Eqs. 17 and 19 respectively,
of approximately 21.6 aircraft per 10,000 square nautical were validated using the instantaneous number of conflicts
miles. logged during the simulation experiments.
For each traffic demand scenario, two repetitions were per- E. Simulation Procedure and Data Logging
formed using different traffic realizations. This resulted in a
To minimize unsystematic variation in the results, stan-
a total of 130 simulation runs for the primary experiment,
dardized simulation conditions were used. For a particular
involving a total of 257,300 flights.
repetition of a traffic demand scenario, the creation times of
2) Flight Path Angle Variation Experiment aircraft and the origins and destinations for aircraft were kept
Since flight path angle, (cid:13), was an important parameter that constant across all airspace concepts. Additionally, scenarios
affected the instantaneous conflict probability between two had a duration of 2 hrs, consisting of a 1 hr traffic volume
aircraftinthreedimensionalairspace,seeEq.16,aexperiment buildup period and a 1hr logging period during which the
wasperformedwithtwodifferentvaluesof(cid:13).Theindependent traffic density was kept constant.
variables for this experiment were: To compute the conflict rate, the properties of active con-
flicts, and the states of all aircraft in the simulation, were
2Based on traffic densities in upper airspace for an area centered around logged periodically every 30 seconds. As mentioned earlier,
Brussels that includes five large TMAs, the positions of which are approxi-
matedtoBrussels,London,Frankfurt,ParisandAmsterdam. 3Insimulationarea,whichislargerthanexperimentarea

--- Page 8 ---

onlyconflictsforaircraftwithintheexperimentareawereused
for model validation, as traffic was more evenly distributed in
this region, see Fig. 6.
V. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
In this section, the results of the three simulation experi-
ments are presented and discussed.
A. Primary Experiment
The goal of the primary experiment was to validate the
conflictratemodelsforbothunstructuredandlayeredairspace
concepts, and to investigate the effect of heading range per
altitude band on the intrinsic safety of the layers concept.
These two aspects are discussed below.
1) Model Accuracy
The conflict rate for unstructured airspace is shown in Fig. 7,
and the corresponding conflict rate model is given by Eq. 17.
The conflict rate results for the Layers 45 concept is shown in
Fig. 8. In addition to the total conflict rate, Fig. 8 also shows
the results for the three different types of conflicts considered
by the conflict rate model for layered airspace, see Eq. 19.
From Figs. 7 and 8, it can be seen that model fitting at
low densities yields accurate conflict rate predictions at high
densities. This suggests that the overall structure of the model
is sound, and that the binomial random variable approach
used for modeling conflict rates in this work is a good way
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
Number of Instantaneous Aircraft [-]
]-[
stcilfnoC
fo
rebmuN
Simulation Data Least-Square Fit Validation
Fig. 7. Total conflict rate for unstructured airspace (primary experiment).
Scatter: simulation data. Red line: least-square fit to Eq. 17. Blue Line:
validationforhigherdensities
Simulation Data Least-Square Fit Validation
400
300
200
100
0
400
300
200
100
0
0 500 1000 0 500 1000
Number of Instantaneous Aircraft [-]
]-[
stcilfnoC
suoenatnatsnI
fo
rebmuN
TABLEIV
MODELACCURACY(UNFILTERED)
Unstructured Layers Layers Layers Layers
Airspace 360 180 90 45
k 1.03 - - - -
k - 1.30 1.44 1.66 2.18
1
k - 1.77 1.73 1.45 1.23 2
k - 1.23 1.24 0.96 0.73
3
to analyze the intrinsic safety of unstructured and layered
airspacedesigns.Similartrendswerefoundfortheotherlayers
concepts (not shown).
To quantitatively assess model accuracy, the values of the
‘k’-constants introduced to the conflict rate models can be
examined,seeTableIV.The‘k’-constantscanbethoughtofas
ascalingfactor.Therefore,thecloser‘k’-constantsareto1,the
moreaccuratethemodelsare.ThevaluesshowninTableIV,as
wellasforallotherresultsfiguresandtables,takeintoaccount
the two repetitions performed for every traffic demand density
scenario.
Table IV shows that the k value for unstructured airspace is
very close to 1. This indicates that Eq. 17 is a very good at
predicting the conflict rate of unstructured airspace. However
forlayers,thek valuesdeviatesignificantlyfrom1.Moreover,
the results show that the model accuracy decreases when the
headingrangeperaltitudelayerisreduced,andthatthemodel
underestimates the conflict rate in most cases (k > 1). This
means that the layers conflict rate model is not very accurate
at estimating the number of conflicts, even though it is able to
predict the shape of the conflict rate curve well.
To determine why the conflict rate model for layered
airspace is not as accurate as expected, two hypotheses are
tested.
The first hypothesis is concerned with differences in the
definitions used for Conflict Detection (CD) by the model
and by the simulation. In the model, a conflict is defined
to occur at a time t when the minimum distance point
cpa
between two aircraft is located within a rectangular ‘conflict
search area’, see Fig. 2. However, in the simulation, the first
moment of conflict detection occurs at time t when the
inconf
separationrequirementsareabouttobeviolated.Consequently,
conflicts are detected earlier in the simulation than for the
approachusedbythemodel,seeFig.9.Furthermore,sincethe
magnitudeofthedifferencebetweenthesetwotimesincreases
with decreasing conflict angle, this hypothesis also explains
why the accuracy of the conflict rate model decreases when
the heading range per altitude layer is reduced.
a b
c d
Fig. 8. Conflict rate for the Layer 45o concept (primary experiment). a)
cruising vs. cruising b) cruising vs.C/D c) CD/ vs. C/D d) total conflict
rate.Scatter:simulationdata.Redline:least-squarefittoEq.19.BlueLine: Fig.9. Differencebetweentcpa,thetimetoclosestpointofapproach,and
validationforhigherdensities tinconf ,thefirstmomentofapredictedlossofseparation

--- Page 9 ---

TABLEV TABLEVII
MODELACCURACY(CONFLICTSFILTEREDBASEDONtcpa) MODELACCURACY(CONFLICTSFILTEREDBASEDONtcpa,AND(cid:11)
CORRECTEDBASEDONMEASUREDCONFLICTANGLE)
Layers Layers Layers Layers
Layers Layers Layers Layers
360 180 90 45
360 180 90 45
k 1.15 1.21 1.23 1.35
1 k (not corrected) 1.15 1.21 1.23 1.35
k 1.65 1.61 1.34 1.12 1
2 k (corrected) 1.15 0.99 0.93 0.93
k 1.05 1.09 0.82 0.64 1
3
TABLEVI 2000
MEASUREDAVERAGECONFLICTANGLE
Average Conflict Angle [deg] 1500
Layers 360 112
Layers 180 82
1000
Layers 90 41
Layers 45 22
500
Totestthishypothesis,afilteringofconflictswasperformed
during post-processing: only conflicts with a t cpa less than 0
the CD look-ahead time were considered since these types of 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
conflicts can be predicted by the model. The corresponding Number of Instantaneous Aircraft [-]
results are shown in Table V.
When comparing the results before and after filtering the
conflicts based on t , it can be seen that the accuracy of the cpa
model has improved significantly. However, in absolute terms,
the model still lacks accuracy.
Thesecondhypothesisregardingtheaccuracyoftheconflict
rate model for Layers is related to the heading distribution of
cruising aircraft. The model is derived assuming a uniform
distributionofaircraft headings withintherangepermittedfor
each altitude band. A uniform distribution of headings should
lead to a triangular distribution of conflict angles between
0o and the allowed heading range per layer, (cid:11), see Fig. 4.
Accordingly, the mean conflict angle should be equal to 1(cid:11).
3
Table VI shows that this assumption was not satisfied for any
ofthelayersconcepts.Thisstronglysuggeststhattheheadings
for aircraft in the traffic scenarios used to validate the model
were not uniformly distributed within the required range per
layer.
To account for the actual heading distribution in the traffic
scenarios, a new model fit was performed after correcting the
allowed heading range, (cid:11), to match the measured conflict
angle for each layered concept using (cid:11) = 3(cid:1)(cid:18), where (cid:18) is
the measured conflict angle. For example (cid:11) for the Layers
45 concept is taken to be 66o based the data presented in
Table VI. This resulted in the k values displayed in Table VII.
Note that in Table VII only values of k1 are shown since
this correction only affects conflicts between pairs of cruising
aircraft. The table shows that the k values are very close to 1
for all layered concepts after correcting for conflict angle, and
filtering conflicts based on t .
cpa
Tosummarize,theaboveanalysisrevealedthattheaccuracy
of the conflict rate model for unstructured airspace is high.
However, the accuracy of the conflict rate model for Layers is
negativelyaffectedbythemismatchbetweentheCDdefinition
used by the simulation and by the model. Since the CD
definition used in the simulation reflects reality better, model
accuracy could be improved by using a larger (trapezoidal)
‘conflict search area’ so that conflicts with a t greater than,
cpa
and a t less than, the look-ahead time can also predicted
inconf
by the model. Additionally, the results for layered airspace
indicated that the heading range per layer was not distributed
]-[
stcilfnoC
suoenatnatsnI
fo
rebmuN
UA L360 L180 L90 L45
Fig.10. Totalconflictrateforallconcepts(primaryexperiment).Thecurves
representtheleast-squarefitofthesimulationdatatoEq.17forUnstructured
Airspace(UA)andtoEq.19forthelayeredairspaceconcepts.
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Number of Instantaneous Aircraft [-]
]-[
stcilfnoC
suoenatnatsnI
fo
rebmuN
UA L360 L180 L90 L45
Fig.11. Conflictrateforcruisingaircraft(primaryexperiment).Thecurves
representtheleast-squarefitofthesimulationdatatoEq.3forUnstructured
Airspace(UA)andtoEq.10forthelayeredairspaceconcepts.
within the expected range. While this also led to a reduction
in accuracy, it should be noted that this was caused by the
scenarios used in the simulation, and not due to the structure
of the model itself. When conflicts were filtered based on t
cpa
and corrections were applied to compensate for the heading
range in the scenario, the accuracy of the model was found to
be high. This suggests that the current conflict rate model for
Layeredairspacecanbealteredasdescribedabovetoimprove
its absolute accuracy.
2) Effect of Heading Range Per Altitude Layer
Fig. 10 shows the conflict rate results for all five airspace
concepts used in the primary experiment. As predicted by
the conflict rate model for layered airspace, this figure shows
that decreasing the heading range per altitude layer leads to
a reduction of the total conflict rate. Further analysis showed
that this safety improvement was mainly due to a reduction
in the number of conflicts between cruising aircraft when the
allowed heading range per layer was decreased, see Fig 11.

--- Page 10 ---

2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Number of Instantaneous Aircraft [-]
]-[
stcilfnoC
suoenatnatsnI
fo
rebmuN
standard non-standard
Fig.12. Effectofvariationinflightpathangleonconflictrateforunstructured
airspace.Herestandardrepresentsthesimulationswitha(cid:13)of2.8o,andnon-
standard represents a (cid:13) of 1.4o. The curves represent the least-square fit of
thesimulationdatatoEq.17
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Number of Instantaneous Aircraft [-]
]-[
stcilfnoC
suoenatnatsnI
fo
rebmuN
500
400
300
200
100
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Number of Instantaneous Aircraft [-]
standard non-standard
Fig. 13. Effect of variation in flight path angle on conflict rate for Layers
45o. Here standard represents the simulations with a (cid:13) of 2.8o, and non-
standard represents a (cid:13) of 1.4o. The curves represent the least-square fit of
thesimulationdatatoEq.19
Since all layered airspace concepts used the same number of
flight levels, based on the structure of Eq. 19, this increased
safety can be attributed to the reduction of relative velocities
between cruising aircraft when the permitted heading range
per altitude layer is decreased.
When comparing the layered concepts to unstructured
airspace, Fig. 10 shows that the conflict rate is always higher
for unstructured airspace. It is interesting to note that this
is also true for the Layers 360 concept. Since there are
no heading-altitude constraints, and therefore no reduction
in relative velocities, for either of these two concepts, the
increasedsafetyofLayers360canbeattributedtotheapriori
vertical separation of traffic that prevents conflicts between
aircraft cruising at different flight levels. Therefore, in this
case,safety wasimprovedby reducingthe number ofpossible
conflictpaircombinationsforlayeredairspacewhencompared
to unstructured airspace.
B. Flight-Path Angle Variation Experiment
The effect of flight path angle on conflict rate has been
analyzed for unstructured airspace and for the Layers 45
concept, see Figs. 12 and 13, respectively. The same traffic
scenariosareusedasfortheprimaryexperiment,buttheflight
path angle, (cid:13), during the climbing and descending phases of
]-[
stcilfnoC
suoenatnatsnI
fo
rebmuN
standard non-standard
Fig.14. EffectofvariationintrueairspeedonconflictrateforLayers45o.
Herestandardrepresentsthesimulationswithaconstantairspeedof500kts,
andnon-standardrepresentsauniformlydistributedairspeedbetween450kts
and550kts.
flight is varied; simulations are performed for a (cid:13) of 2.8o and
for a (cid:13) of 1.4o.
Although the origins, the destinations and the cruising
altitudes for traffic are the same, a change in (cid:13) changes the
ratio between the number of cruising vs. climbing/descending
aircraft at any given moment in time. A reduction in (cid:13) causes
an aircraft to take more time to reach its cruising altitude.
Therefore, a reduction in (cid:13) also increases the proportion of
climbing/descending aircraft in the simulation.
The conflict probability between aircraft in unstructured
airspace is not significantly affected by their flight phases.
Consequently,Figure12onlyshowsasmalleffectofachange
in (cid:13) on conflict rate. The slight increase in conflict rate for
(cid:13) =1:4o canbeexplainedbythefactthataircraftspendmore
time climbing/descending, and less time cruising, for a lower
(cid:13). This slightly increases average flight path angle over the
course of a flight, which in turn slightly increases the conflict
probability between aircraft as described by Eq. 16.
In contrast, Fig. 13 shows that (cid:13) has a drastic effect on the
conflict rate for layered airspace. The safety benefits offered
by layered airspace applies only to cruising aircraft as there
arenoproceduralmechanismstoseparateclimbing/descending
aircraft from each other or with cruising aircraft. Therefore, a
reduction in (cid:13) increases the amount of time needed for an
aircraft to reach its cruising altitude, and benefit from the
reduction in conflict probability between cruising aircraft in at
thesameflightlevelforLayers.Thisexplainswhytheconflict
rate is significantly higher when (cid:13) is reduced to 1.4o for the
Layers 45 concept.
Basedontheaboveanalysis,itcanbeconcludedthatconflict
rate is inversely proportional to flight path angle because it
changes the ratio between cruising and climbing/descending
aircraft. Moreover the safety of Layers is more sensitive to
flight path angle changes than for unstructured airspace.
C. Airspeed Variation Experiment
The final experiment investigated the effect of airspeed
variations on conflict rate. To this end, two sets of simulations
were performed for the Layers 45 concept. In the first set of
simulations, all aircraft flew at 500 kts, while in the second
set, the speed of aircraft was uniformly distributed between
450 kts and 550 kts.
Theconflictrateresultsforairspeedvariationsaredisplayed
in Fig. 14. The figure shows no difference in the conflict rate
between the two airspeed cases, since the average speed of

--- Page 11 ---

all aircraft in both cases is the same and equals 500 kts. This [7] J. Ellerbroek, “Airborne Conflict Resolution in Three Dimensions,”
suggests accurate estimates of conflict rate can be computed Ph.D.dissertation,DelftUniversityofTechnology,FacultyofAerospace
Engineering, Sep. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://resolver.tudelft.nl/
using the models derived in this work as long as the average
uuid:96c65674-06d4-410c-87c2-b981af95211e
traffic speed, or the distribution of speeds, is known. [8] Sunil,E.,Hoekstra,J.M.,Ellerbroek,J.,andBussink,F.,“TheInfluence
of Traffic Structure on Airspace Capacity,” in Proceedings of the 7th
VI. CONCLUSIONSANDRECOMMENDATIONS International Conference on Research in Air Transportation (ICRAT
2016),Jun.2016.
In this paper, conflict rate models for unstructured and
[9] E. Sunil, J. Ellerbroek, J. Hoekstra, A. Vidosavljevic, M. Arntzen,
layered airspace designs were developed. The models derived F.Bussink,andD.Nieuwenhuisen,“AnalysisofAirspaceStructureand
in this work take into account conflicts between aircraft in Capacity for Decentralized Separation Using Fast-Time Simulations,”
JournalofGuidance,Control,andDynamics,vol.40,no.1,pp.38–51,
different flight phases; conflicts between cruising aircraft,
2017.[Online].Available:http://dx.doi.org/10.2514/1.G000528
between climbing/descending aircraft, and between cruising [10] Hoekstra, J., Maas, J., Tra, M., and Sunil, E., “How Do Layered
and climbing/descending aircraft are considered. Fast-time Airspace Design Parameters Affect Airspace Capacity and Safety?” in
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Research in Air
simulationexperimentswereconductedtovalidatethemodels,
Transportation,Jun.2016.
and to compare unstructured and layered airspace designs in [11] R.IrvineandH.Hering,“TowardsSystematicAirTrafficManagement
terms of safety. The following conclusions can be drawn: in a Regular Lattice,” in 7th AIAA ATIO Conf, 2nd CEIAT Int’l Conf
on Innov and Integr in Aero Sciences, 17th LTA Systems Tech Conf;
(cid:15) A model fit at low densities produced accurate conflict followed by 2nd TEOS Forum, 2007, p. 7780. [Online]. Available:
rate estimates for high densities. Therefore, the binomial http://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2007-7780
[12] K. Leiden, S. Peters, and S. Quesada, “Flight level-based dynamic
randomvariableapproachusedformodelingconflictrates
airspace configuration,” in Proceedings of the 9th AIAA Aviation
in this work is a good way to analyze the intrinsic safety Technology, Integration and Operations (ATIO) Forum. American
of unstructured and layered airspace designs. Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2009-7104
(cid:15) The safety of layered airspace increases when the head-
[13] R. A. Paielli, “A Linear Altitude Rule for Safer and More Efficient
ing range per altitude layer is decreased. This effect is Enroute Air Traffic,” Air Traffic Control Quarterly, vol. 8, no. 3,
predicted by the presented conflict rate model, and it is 2000. [Online]. Available: http://www.aviationsystemsdivision.arc.nasa.
gov/publications/2000/Paielli ATCQ Alt-Rules 2000.pdf
because the relative velocities, and therefore the conflict
[14] InternationalCivilAviationOrganization,“Annex2,RulesoftheAir,”
probabilities,betweencruisingaircraftareproportionalto Tech.Rep.,Jul.2005.
the heading range per flight level. [15] M. R. Jardin, “Analytical Relationships Between Conflict Counts and
Air-Traffic Density,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics,
(cid:15) Layered airspace was found to be safer than unstructured
vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1150–1156, 2005. [Online]. Available: http:
airspacefortheentirerangeofdensitiesconsideredinthis //dx.doi.org/10.2514/1.12758
work. This was also true for a layered concept that did [16] J. Hoekstra and J. Ellerbroek, “BlueSky ATC Simulator Project: an
Open Data and Open Source Approach,” in Proceedings of the 7th
notrestricttheheadingsofaircraft,butdidusepredefined
InternationalConferenceonResearchinAirTransportation,Jun.2016.
flight levels for cruising aircraft. This is because the a [17] Eurocontrol, “High-Density 2015 European Traffic Distributions for
priori vertical separation of traffic in the layers concept Simulation,”Tech.Rep.,Mar.2000.
reduces the number of possible conflict pairs, and also
AUTHORBIOGRAPHIES
reduces the conflict probability between cruising aircraft.
Martijn Tra received the MSc degree in Aerospace Engineering
(cid:15) Conflictrateisinverselyproportionaltoflightpathangle.
from TU Delft in 2016, for modeling the effect of layered airspace
The safety of the Layers concept was found to be more
on conflict rate and capacity. During his MSc, he performed an
sensitive to changes in flight path angle compared to internship at Schiphol Group, where he developed a tool to assess
unstructured airspace. This is because the safety benefits thecompetitivenessofSchipholairport.Heiscurrentlyworkingasan
oflayeredairspaceareonlyapplicabletocruisingaircraft, engineer at ADB Safegate, working with advanced airport solutions.
Emmanuel Sunil received the MSc degree in Aerospace Engi-
while conflict probability is not significantly affected by
neering(cumlaude)fromTUDelftin2014,forhisworkonahaptic
flight phase for unstructured airspace.
interface for unmanned aircraft collision avoidance. He is currently
(cid:15) The absolute accuracy of the conflict rate models, partic- a PhD candidate at the faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft.
ularly for layered airspace, can be further improved by His work focuses on airspace design and capacity modeling.
relaxing model assumptions related to conflict detection. Joost Ellerbroek received the M.Sc. (2007) and Ph.D. (2013)
degrees in aerospace engineering from the Delft University of Tech-
This will be the focus of future work.
nology, The Netherlands, with the Control and Simulation section,
REFERENCES whereheiscurrentlyworkingasanAssistantProfessor.Hisresearch
interestslieinthefieldofAirTrafficManagement,andincludetopics
[1] SESAR Consortium, “The Concept of Operations at a glance,” Single suchastheanalysisofairspacecomplexityandcapacity,datascience
EuropeanSky,Tech.Rep.,2007. in ATM, the design and analysis of conflict detection and resolution
[2] JointPlanningandDevelopmentOffice,“Conceptofoperationsforthe algorithms, and human-automation interaction.
Next Generation Air Transportation System,” FAA, Tech. Rep., Jun. Jacco Hoekstra obtained his MSc, PhD and private pilot license
2007.
from TU Delft. He has worked at the Dutch National Aerospace
[3] J. M. Hoekstra, R. N. H. W. van Gent, and R. C. J. Ruigrok,
Laboratory(NLR)for16years,andhasco-operatedwithNASA,the
“Designing for safety: the free flight air traffic management concept,”
Reliability Engineering & System Safety, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 215–232, FAA and many European organizations. He founded the Association
Feb. 2002. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ for Scientific Development of ATM, was the founding director of
article/pii/S0951832001000965 AT-One and was the head of NLR’s Air Transport Division. After
[4] J. M. Hoekstra, R. C. J. Ruigrok, and R. N. H. W. van Gent, “Free serving two terms as dean of the Aerospace Engineering faculty of
FlightinaCrowdedAirspace?”inProceedingsofthe3rdUSA/Europe TU Delft, he is now a full professor at this faculty, and holds the
AirTrafficManagementR&DSeminar,Naples,Jun.2000. chair in CNS/ATM. His research topics include 4D trajectory based
[5] M. Ballin, J. Hoekstra, D. Wing, and G. Lohr, “NASA Langley ATM, airborne separation assurance and controller-pilot data link
and NLR Research of Distributed Air/Ground Traffic Management,”
communication. Next to research, he teaches courses on CNS/ATM,
in AIAA Aircraft Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO)
programming in Python and aeronautics.
Conference, AIAA-2002-5826. American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://arc.aiaa.org/doi/abs/10.
2514/6.2002-5826
[6] J. K. Kuchar and L. C. Yang, “A Review of Conflict Detection and
ResolutionModelingMethods,”IEEETransactionsonIntelligentTrans-
portationSystems,vol.1,pp.179–189,2000.