

--- Page 1 ---

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309293535
Neuromuscular-System-Based Tuning of a Haptic Shared Control Interface for
UAV Teleoperation
Article in IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems · August 2017
DOI: 10.1109/THMS.2016.2616280
CITATIONS READS
35 477
5 authors, including:
Jan Smisek Emmanuel Sunil
Transcelestial Technologies Netherlands Aerospace Centre
27 PUBLICATIONS 805 CITATIONS 38 PUBLICATIONS 566 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Marinus M. Van Paassen David Abbink
Delft University of Technology Delft University of Technology
490 PUBLICATIONS 6,819 CITATIONS 225 PUBLICATIONS 5,328 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jan Smisek on 25 November 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- Page 2 ---

IEEETRANSACTIONSONHUMAN-MACHINESYSTEMS 1
Neuromuscular System Based Tuning of a Haptic
Shared Control Interface for UAV Teleoperation
J. Smisek1,2, Student Member, IEEE, E. Sunil1, M. M. van Paassen1, Senior Member, IEEE,
D. A. Abbink3, Senior Member, IEEE, and M. Mulder1
operator to decide how to react to these. The operator can
Abstract—Haptic guidance is a promising way to support Un-
dothisintwoways:byconsciouslygeneratingaforcetogive
mannedAerialVehicle(UAV)operators,butthedesignofhaptic
guidanceforcesisoftenheuristic.Thispaperdescribesthedesign wayorcounteracttheguidanceforces,butalsobyintentionally
and experimental validation of a systematic neuromuscular changing the neuromuscular system (NMS) properties of the
analysisbasedtuningprocedureforhapticguidance,hereapplied limb interacting with the control interface. In other words,
tohapticcollisionavoidancesystemforUAVtele-operation.This
if the operator agrees with the provided automatic’s support,
tuning procedure is hypothesized to reduce operator workload
he/shecanbecomecompliantandgivewaytothehapticforces.
as compared to current heuristic tuning methods. The proposed
procedure takes into consideration the estimated mechanical In contrast, if the operator disagrees, he/she can stiffen up to
response of the neuromuscular system (NMS) to haptic cues. A resist the haptic force, effectively overruling the automation.
‘relaxtask’settingoftheNMS,forwhichreflexiveandmuscular In this manner, the operator can dynamically interact with the
activation is minimal, is chosen as the design point for tuning
automation during the operation [2].
the haptic support, as this setting is expected to yield minimal
physical workload. The paper first presents a neuromuscular Theadvantageousadaptabilityoftheoperator’sneuromuscu-
identification experiment, performed to estimate the ‘relax task’ lar system also makes HSC systems challenging to design. To
admittance of an operator’s arm. The averaged admittance of cause the desired control interface position, thereby providing
a group of subjects (n = 10) was then used for tuning the
the correct inputs to the controlled system, the HSC system
haptic shared controller, which was subsequently evaluated in
force needs to be correctly scaled to match the instantaneous
its ability to support different operators (n=12) in a simulated
unmannedaerialvehiclesurveillancetask.Resultsshowthatour ‘setting’ of the operator’s arm NMS (i.e., whether the op-
novel tuning procedure indeed reduces operator workload and erator’s arm is compliant, stiff or in between). Although it
also improves situation awareness compared to haptic settings may be feasible to estimate the NMS admittance in real-
that ignore the neuromuscular system. In fact, it is shown
time [4], adapting the HSC system based on adaptation of the
that over-tuning, which frequently occurs for these heuristically
operator might lead to undesirable outcomes. For instance, if
tuned systems, leads to even lower user acceptance scores than
interfaces without any haptic support. the operator, by stiffening-up, aims to regain control authority
over the controlled system, the automation could adapt to
Index Terms—Haptic cues, Human-automation Interaction,
this change by increasing the force scaling, and effectively
Human-Vehicle Interface, Musculoskeletal system
over-ruling the operator [5]. Therefore, we explored tuning
the HSC system to one fixed scaling, that corresponds to a
I. INTRODUCTION
specific (and beneficial) setting of the NMS system. When
InHapticSharedControl(HSC)systems,ahumanoperator
the operator matches his/her neuromuscular behavior to this
and an automatic controller share control of a dynamical
expected stiffness, the haptic forces will then cause correctly
processonacommoncontrolinterface,thatservesastheonly
scaled inputs to the human-in-the-loop system.
input to the controlled system [1]. Such design ensures that
It is common practice to heuristically tune this scaling to
the operator is continuously informed about the actions of the
thesatisfactionofthesystemdesigner[6].However,weaimto
automation, allowing him/her to stay involved in the decision
improve and formalize the tuning process. In our preliminary
making process through intuitive haptic interactions [2]. In
studieswepresentedanidentificationmethodtomeasurerelax
doing so, HSC has the potential to support operators while
task admittance on realistic haptic control interfaces [7] and
mitigating some of the human-machine interaction issues
then tested its utility in a UAV collision avoidance system [8].
frequently associated with automated control systems, such
The aim of the current paper is twofold: First, we provide
as loss of skills and situational awareness [1]–[3].
a complete systematic and experimentally validated tuning
Implementing the actions of the automatic system as ad-
method that uses the operator’s arm relax task setting as
ditional guidance forces on the control interface allows the
the design stiffness. Second, expanding upon our previous
This research is supported by the Dutch Technology Foundation STW, studies [7], [8], this research will provide more insight into
whichispartoftheNetherlandsOrganizationforScientificResearch(NWO), the interaction of the operators with the haptic cues by inves-
andwhichispartlyfundedbytheMinistryofEconomicAffairs.
1FacultyofAerospaceEngineering,DelftUniversityofTechnology,Delft, tigating the agreement of operators with the provided haptic
theNetherlands;{j.smisek,e.sunil,m.m.vanpaassen,m.mulder}@tudelft.nl support and analyzing how this agreement changes based on
2Telerobotics and Haptics Laboratory, ESTEC, European Space Agency, specific situation during the flight.
Noordwijk,theNetherlands
3Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering, Delft Uni- We first introduce a haptic collision avoidance system that
versityofTechnology,Delft,theNetherlands;d.a.abbink@tudelft.nl reliesonanartificialforcefieldandexplaintheavailableHSC
©2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. This article was accepted for publication in IEEE
TransactionsonHuman-MachineSystemsandthefinalversionisavailableathttp://ieeexplore.ieee.org/.DOI:10.1109/THMS.2016.2616280

--- Page 3 ---

2 IEEETRANSACTIONSONHUMAN-MACHINESYSTEMS
UAVstatefeedback(vision,instruments)
tuning choices based on the attainable settings of the human
Humanoperator
NMS,inSectionII.Motivationfortherelax-tasksettingbased
tuning is discussed in detail. We then identify the challenges MH δst UAVstate
associated with obtaining (relax task) neuromuscular admit- Cognitivecontrol + + arm+stickdyn UAV
tance measurement on a spring-centered control interface and
presentanappropriateexperimentalidentificationprocedurein MG δ s ∗ t
SectionIII.InSectionIV,relaxtasktuning,usingtheaverage (arm+stickdyn)−1 Parametricriskfield Environment
data from the first experiment, is used in a human-in-the- Collisionavoidancesystem
loop experiment simulating UAV teleoperation, to judge user
acceptanceofthenoveltuningprocedure.Thepaperconcludes Fig. 1. UAV teleoperation with a haptic Collision avoidance system. Based
ontheUAVstateintheenvironment,theParametricriskfield calculatesan
withacomprehensivediscussionoftheresultsandsummarizes
optimalcollisionavoidancemaneuver,thatisscaledbytheinversearm/stick
the main conclusions, in Sections V and VI. dynamicstoahapticcueonthecontrolside-stick(basedon[7]).Amethod
tochosethisscalingoptimallyisthefocusofthecurrentpaper.
II. NEUROMUSCULARBASEDTUNINGOF reduced, but without sacrificing system safety or human
HAPTICSHAREDCONTROL control authority over the automation. The motivation was,
This section introduces a human-centered tuning approach building on our preliminary studies [7], [19], to provide a
for haptic cues that is based on properties and measurements systematicandvalidatedtuningmethodthatwouldachievethe
oftheoperator’sarmNMS.First,theUAVcollisionavoidance aforementioned objective, without relying on heuristic tuning.
system is introduced. Second, neuromuscular properties rele-
vant to the tuning approach are presented together with the A teleoperated UAV scenario, with addition of the collision
theoretical rationale of the tuning method. avoidance system, is illustrated in Fig. 1. An outer feedback
loop to the UAV teleoperator is complemented with an inner
haptic feedback loop generated by the collision avoidance
A. UAV collision avoidance system and previous work
system. The operator controls the UAV through the side-
An interesting application of HSC in aviation is the use of stick position δ . The haptic guidance moment, M , and
st G
hapticfeedbacktoimprovethesafetyofUnmannedAerialVe- the moment generated by the teleoperator, M , act together
H
hicles(UAVs)[9].Previouslypresentedstudiesaugmentedthe on the side-stick. The resulting position of the side-stick, δ ,
st
visual feedback from onboard cameras with haptic guidance constitutes the sole steering command issued to the UAV.
momentsappliedonacontrolinterfacetohelpteleoperatorsin Thecollisionavoidancesystembecomeseffectiveonlyifthe
steeringaUAVawayfromobstacles[10]–[14].Allthesestud- UAV flies into a close vicinity of an obstacle. The parametric
ies have indicated that such a system improves the safety of risk field system scans the environment for obstacles and
teleoperation, but at the cost of increased workload [14], [15]. computes the risk of collision with the corresponding optimal
Similar issues were also reported from systems implemented avoidance maneuver [16]. The optimal collision avoidance is
in car driving domain [1]. achieved with the optimal side-stick position δ ∗. To yield the
st
These previous HSC systems were designed heuristically, desired δ ∗, it has to be converted to a properly scaled haptic
st
i.e., the HSC force scaling was found by testing different guidance moment, M . The optimal choice of this particular
G
values in a human-in-the-loop study, until satisfactory perfor- scaling is the focus of the current paper.
mance was achieved. For instance, the primary objective of
one of the studies was to improve system safety over pure
B. Properties of the Human Neuromuscular System
manual control [16]. To realize this goal, the haptic controller
was typically tuned to generate very strong haptic guidance Neuromuscular system admittance of the operator arm to
moments. While ‘over-tuning’ haptic cues improved safety, external (haptic) forces, i.e., the displacement caused by an
it also biased control authority towards the automation [15]. external force, is an important parameter for designing HSC
Recent research has shown that heuristic tuning can result in systems [20]. The intrinsic NMS properties are formed by
disagreementsbetweenthehumanoperatorandtheautomation the contribution of the skeleton (mainly the inertia) and by
on a the neuromuscular level [17]. the contribution of different muscles (the inertia, stiffness
The difficulty with heuristic tuning has been attributed to and damping) [21]. However, the NMS is highly adaptive,
the large adaptation range of the neuromuscular system. It Fig. 2a, and admittance can be varied over a wide range of
was observed that operators are able to adapt their NMS values through two physiological mechanisms: fast subcon-
properties such that performance and overall system stability sciousspinalreflexesandmusclepairco-contraction[21].The
are satisfactory, regardless of the specific tuning used. How- neuromuscularsystemusesseveralsensorslocatedinandnear
ever, adaptations to non-optimal settings of the NMS, as is the muscles for its feedback mechanism, such as the muscle
oftenthecasewithheuristictuningmethods,causesthehaptic spindles and the Golgi Tendon Organs (GTO). The muscle
cues to be perceived as too strong, resulting in increased user spindles feedback muscle length and muscle velocity and the
discomfort and workload over time [18]. GTO feed back the force measured in the muscle tendons.
As a objective for the current study, it was hypothesized The NMS adaptation is achieved by changing the reflex path
that in order to improve user acceptance of HSC systems, strength.Strongermusclespindlefeedbackproducesaposition
it is necessary to tune haptic cues such that workload is feedbackloopthatgeneratesaloweradmittance(stifferNMS).

--- Page 4 ---

SMISEKetal.:NEUROMUSCULARSYSTEMBASEDTUNINGOFAHAPTICSHAREDCONTROLINTERFACEFORUAVTELEOPERATION 3
TABLEI
DESCRIPTIONOFTHETHREENEUROMUSCULARTASKINSTRUCTIONS.
Task Admittance Description
Yield to haptic moments and the
ForceTask(FT) High
motionofcontrolinterface
Donotreacttohapticmomentsand
RelaxTask(RT) Medium
followmotionofcontrolinterface
Resist haptic moments and main-
PositionTask(PT) Low
tainpositionofcontrolinterface
dynamics of the NMS and of the control interface to com-
pute the haptic guidance force, see Fig. 2b. Applying this
specific haptic guidance force, assuming the operator keeps
thesameNMSsetting,willresultinoptimalstickpositionand
consequently in a successful avoidance maneuver. Here, the
HSC provides mostly low frequency inputs [16], [19] and so
the stick/arm inverse dynamics can be considered as stiffness,
(a)Armposition-forcerelationshipatdifferentNMSsettings.
yielding a guidance control law:
∗
M δ
(cid:20) M G G p r (cid:21) =[K NMS(δst)+K st] (cid:20) δ s s ∗ t t p r (cid:21) , (1)
combinedstiffness
where K NMS is the|stiffness{ozf the NM}S and K st is the
stiffness of the side-stick control interface. The K NMS and
K st are defined separately along the pitch (p) and roll (r)
hand/stick axes. The optimal side-stick input δ ∗ in Eq. (1)
st
represents the output of the parametric risk field (described
in more detail in Section IV-A3). Note that the tuning law
accounts for the dependence of K NMS on the magnitude and
direction of manual control inputs applied on the side-stick,
δst. To implement the control law described above, a value
for K NMS has to be selected. Three available, NMS inspired,
design options are described next.
D. NMS related tuning choices
(b) Optimal stick position as result of correctly scaled haptic The following choices for neuromuscular stiffness, and
guidanceforce.
therebythetuningofthehapticfeedback,canbedistinguished:
1) Intrinsic (relax task) stiffness: The haptic feedback is
Fig.2. Neuromuscularbasedtuningrationale.Figure(a)illustratesthewide
rangeofarmadmittancesettingstheoperatorcanadopt.Theintrinsicstiffness tuned to match the intrinsic stiffness of the operator’s NMS,
correspondstorelaxtasksituation,whenoperatorsdonotexertanyforcesor i.e., the haptic feedback moment is scaled such that when
changetheiradmittance.In(b)thesharedcontrolsystemistunedtoadesign
applied, it will move operator’s relaxed arm holding the stick
stiffness which, together with the side stick stiffness, forms the combined
stiffnessofthewholesystem.Figureadaptedfrom[7]. to the ‘optimal stick position’. The haptic feedback will result
in the correct stick response, unless the operator stiffens up,
The reverse is also possible, stronger GTO feedback produces actively disagreeing with the guidance. The advantage of this
a higher admittance (less stiff NMS). Effectively, the stiffness
tuning is that the physical work of the operator is minimized;
oftheneuromuscularsystemcanberaisedorloweredthrough
for the intrinsic stiffness the Golgi tendon organ and muscle
theneuralfeedback [20]–[22].Toevoke differentNMSadmit-
spindle feedback paths are not used. In many cases the spring
tancesettings,humanscanbeinstructedtorespondtoexternal
stiffness of the stick will be higher than the intrinsic stiffness
momentsinthreedistinctwaysknowninliteratureastheforce,
of the human operator. Consequently, the stick stiffness alone
the relax and the position tasks [20], see Table I.
will not be too different from the combined stiffness of the
stick and hand, and so the this tuning will also produce an
acceptable response for a hands-off control.
C. Neuromuscular admittance based tuning method
2) Lower than intrinsic stiffness: The haptic feedback is
Haptic guidance moments applied on the control interface tuned to match a lower than intrinsic stiffness of the NMS
aretransmittedtothehumanoperatorviahis/herNMS.There- of the operator [18] (with force task stiffness being the lower
fore it is necessary to include the response of the NMS limit). Such tuning keeps the operator more involved in the
to haptic cues when tuning the haptic controller [17], [18]. control loop by requiring active NMS adaptation towards
Effectively, this approach uses the inverse of the combined the force task, which can be described as requiring active

--- Page 5 ---

4 IEEETRANSACTIONSONHUMAN-MACHINESYSTEMS
agreement. Interestingly, even negative stiffness tuning has Ethics Committee. Subjects gave their informed consent prior
been used in literature: to encourage fast evasive maneuvers to the experiment and no monetary compensation was offered.
in a car driving support system [23]. Thesubjectswereseatedinanadjustablechair,Fig.3,such
3) Higher than intrinsic stiffness: The haptic feedback is thattherightforearmwasparallelwiththerollaxisofthestick.
tuned to match a higher than intrinsic stiffness of the NMS The stick’s hardware casing served as a rest for the forearm.
(with position task stiffness being the upper limit). The haptic Subjects were asked to perform force task, Table I, keeping
guidance moment would result in correct stick position if the constant grip and hand position during the experiment.
operator maintains increased arm stiffness, otherwise the stick 2) Experiment design and procedure: Three levels of bias
position response to the haptic guidance will be too large, moment magnitude were tested, 0, 0.7 and 1.4 [Nm], in six
leading to overshoots during the avoidance maneuvers [17]. directions: 0 ◦, 45 ◦, 90 ◦, 135 ◦, 180 ◦, and 270 ◦; constituting
Depending on the actual tuning, it can be difficult for the thirteen test conditions C . A wide-band test signal (Sec-
1..13
operator to overrule the haptic feedback. tion III-A4), applied as an additional moment on the stick,
Inthispaper,weadvocatethechoiceofusingintrinsicstiff- wasused.Both,asameansofexcitationtobeabletoidentify
ness as the reference in tuning the collision avoidance HSC, the NMS, and to ensure that the reflex feedback action is
forthreereasons.First,intrinsicstiffnessbasedtuningensures suppressed. The experiment lasted approximately 1.5 hours,
that the physical workload of the operator is minimized, since includingbriefing,debriefing,familiarizationruns,andbreaks.
no muscular activity is required to maintain intrinsic stiffness. The experiment started with performing multiple training
Second, the system prevents colliding, unless the operator runs to familiarize the subjects with the tasks. After that
actively disagree by stiffening up the arm. And third, this three experimental runs were done for all 13 conditions. Each
setting has the attractive property that when the stick is individualrunlasted60seconds,consistingof10secondsrun-
released, the UAV will steer away from nearby obstacles. in time and of approximately 50 seconds measurement time,
resultingin9fullperiodsofthetestsignalforeverycondition.
3) Apparatus: Theelectro-hydraulicsidestickwitharmrest
E. Identifying intrinsic neuromuscular system admittance
(A),inFig.3,islocatedtotherightofanadjustablechair.An
The NMS properties of human subjects are typically deter- 18inchdisplay,(B),waslocatedatadistanceof80cminfront
mined in three fundamental tasks, Table I [24]. The intrinsic of the subject. The side stick could move with two degrees of
stiffness of the neuromuscular system can be directly deter- freedom, in pitch and roll rotation. The effective length, from
minedintherelaxtask,inwhichthereflexesarenotusedand axis of rotation to the center of the hand, between the middle
thearmdynamicsaredominatedbyitsvisco-elasticproperties. andindexfinger,was0.09[m]andthemotionrangewas±22 ◦
However, the UAV control stick is normally spring centered, for pitch and ±30 ◦ for roll motion. The side stick measured
requiring the operator, in order to command UAV motion, to T
the stick angular displacement δ (t) = δ (t), δ (t) ,
deflect the stick by applying force on it. The intrinsic NMS the handling moment m(t) = [m st (t), m(cid:2)( s t t ) p ] T app st l r ied (cid:3)by
p r
properties therefore need to be determined in presence of a
the subject on the stick, and the disturbance moment d(t) =
bias force. Unfortunately, it is unattainable for subjects to [d (t), d (t)] T imposed on it, for both roll and pitch respec-
maintain the required bias force and simultaneously suppress p r
tively. Signals were sampled at 250 Hz. The active side stick
their neural reflexes to correctly execute the relax task. A
was controlled to behave as a mass-spring-damper system, as:
method to overcome this practical challenge and identify the
intrinsic NMS in a force task is described in the next section. δ (s) 1
H (s)= st = , (2)
st m(s) I s2+B s+K
st st st
III. NEUROMUSCULARIDENTIFICATIONEXPERIMENT where, for both the pitch and roll directions, inertia of I =
st
The identification of human neuromuscular properties tradi- 0.02[kgm2], damping coefficient B st =0.2[Nmsrad −1] and
tionally relies on using multisine signals to provide excitation spring coefficient K st =2[Nmrad −1] were used.
forces on a range of frequencies. However, the distribution 4) Disturbance signal design: Two uncorrelated multi-sine
of power over the frequencies influences the reflexive action signalsd p (t)andd r (t)weredesignedinthefrequencydomain
of the NMS [25]. A novel identification method, described in to excite the stick-arm dynamics in pitch and roll directions.
detail in a previous study [7], uses a disturbance signal with Bothsignalscontainedpowerat20logarithmicallydistributed
a wide-band spectrum, to suppress the arm’s natural reflexes. frequencies, f = [f p , f r ] T, within a range of 0.4Hz and
In this manner the adaptation range of the NMS is effectively 20Hz, Fig. 4a. The phases were selected to minimize the
limited to the intrinsic visco-elastic properties. crest factor (peak-to-average amplitude ratio) [26]. Figure 4b
shows one period (16.38s) of the disturbance signal in the
time domain [27].
A. Method
The signals had full power between 0.4Hz and 2.5Hz
1) Subjects and task instructions: Ten subjects (three fe- and 20% of the power above that frequency. A standard
male), all staff or graduate students of TU Delft, with an approach in human NMS admittance identification literature
averageageof28.6years(σ =2.4)performedtheexperiment. isto usethe fullpower signalonly approximately below 1 Hz
All subjects were right-handed, none reported injuries or any (reducedpowermethod[25]).Incontrast,inthiswork,thefull
otherdisorderintheupperextremities.Theexperimentwasap- powersignalwasintentionallyappliedabovethisfrequency,to
provedbytheDelftUniversityofTechnologyHumanResearch actuallysuppressthenaturalreflexesoftheoperator’sarm,and

--- Page 6 ---

SMISEKetal.:NEUROMUSCULARSYSTEMBASEDTUNINGOFAHAPTICSHAREDCONTROLINTERFACEFORUAVTELEOPERATION 5
Fig.3. Neuromuscularidentificationexperimentsetup.Thesubjectusedthe
stick(A),tocontrolpositionofawhitedotonthedisplay(B).
allow the identification of intrinsic admittance. Alternatively,
a uniform power distribution over all disturbance frequencies
could have been used, or the higher frequencies could be
omitted altogether in the future identification experiments,
since these are not needed for the presented tuning method.
]zH/2m2N[ddS
Roll Pitch
0.45
0.3
0.15
0
0 4 8 12 16 20
Frequency[Hz]
(a)Perturbationsignaldesignedinfrequencydomain.
Time[s]
]mN[)t(d
uated by using four separate single-input and single-output
spectral estimators [27], [29]. The admittance is calculated
separately for all thirteen conditions (C ):
i=1..13
Sδstpdp (f
p
) Sδstpdr (f
r
)
Gˆ (f)= Smpdp (f p ) Smrdr (f r )  (3)
Ci Sδstrdp (f
p
) Sδstrdr (f
r
)


Smpdp (f
p
) Smrdr (f
r
) 

7) Endpoint admittance ellipse: An intuitive way to vi-
sualize the 2-DOF dynamic characteristic of the endpoint
admittance is using admittance ellipses [24]. The admittance
ellipsedisplaysthemagnitudeanddirectionoftheresponseof
the NMS to a unit moment input and is characterized by the
sizeanddirectionofitsmajorandminoraxes.Themajoraxis
oftheellipsecorrespondstothedirectionoftheNMSwiththe
least resistance to moment disturbances (highest admittance),
and the minor axis to the direction with the largest resistance.
The admittance ellipse can be evaluated at frequencies of the
disturbances f ∈f by:
δ cos(α)
ellr =|Gˆ (f)| ,0≤α≤2π, (4)
(cid:20) δ ellp (cid:21) Ci (cid:20) sin(α) (cid:21)
where δ and δ are the endpoint rotations for roll and
ellr ellp
pitch to unit moment disturbances, respectively.
B. Results
The endpoint admittance ellipses at a low frequency (f =
0.5Hz)forallconditionsaveragedoverallsubjectsareshown
asinFig.5(standarddeviationisdisplayedinlightgray).Data
of one subject were discarded due to its very low admittance
indicating incorrect execution of the requested task. Presented
experimental data are publicly available online [30].
90◦
pitch
Roll Pitch
0.4
0.2
135◦ 45◦
0
−0.2
−0.4
0 4 8 12 16
(b)Onecompleteperiod(16.38s)ofthedisturbancesignal.
Fig. 4. Disturbance signal. Frequency and time domain content of the
disturbancemomentrealizationsforrollandpitch.
180◦
0◦
roll
5) Experimental data pre-processing: As a first step, mean
0.7Nm
values were subtracted from the measured time domain sig-
nals, (d(t), δ st (t) and m(t)). Then the repetitions over the 1.4Nm
same condition were averaged in the time domain to reduce
measurement noise and non-linear behavior of the NMS (e.g.,
voluntary inputs, muscle fatigue).
6) Admittance estimation using spectral analysis: The mo-
0.4rad/Nm
mentinputm(t),disturbanceinputd(t)andstickangleoutput
δ (t) were used to estimate auto- and cross-spectral densities
st
S
δstd
(f) and S
md
(f) at the frequencies of the disturbance 270◦
signal f. The NMS admittance is then obtained by using a
Fig.5. Meanestimatedadmittanceellipsesoverallsubjectsatf =0.5Hz.
closed-loop identification method [28].
Thestandarddeviation,showninlightgray,indicatesrelativelyhighconsis-
Because the disturbance moment inputs are uncorrelated, tencyinresponsesamongthegroupofsubjects.
themultiple-inputandmultiple-outputadmittancecanbeeval-

--- Page 7 ---

6 IEEETRANSACTIONSONHUMAN-MACHINESYSTEMS
IV. UAVTELEOPERATIONEXPERIMENT hapticmomentsarecalculatedandappliedontheside-stickby
thehapticcontrollertohelptheteleoperatortosteerawayfrom
The set of NMS admittance measurements, previously ob-
possible collisions. The PRF [16], was specifically designed
tained in Section III, is in this section used as a reference for
for UAV teleoperation. It was found to generate more stable
tuning a HSC collision avoidance system, and evaluated in a
haptic moments, when compared to other haptic collision
human study with a teleoperated UAV control task.
avoidance fields discussed in literature [15], [16], [31].
The shape and size of the risk field is proportional to the
A. UAV Teleoperation
instantaneous UAV velocity, v, and inversely proportional to
1) UAV model: The UAV was modeled as an ‘easy-to- its maximum deceleration, a . If the UAV is stationary, the
max
fly’, control-augmented, helicopter with a rotor diameter of field spans only a small circular region around the UAV. For
3 [m] [14]. Longitudinal side-stick inputs δ p were mapped to non-zerovelocities,thefieldextendsinthedirectionofmotion
forwardvelocitycommandsV x ,whereaslateralinputsδ r were to provide sufficient time for the teleoperator to react to the
mappedtoyawratecommandsψ˙,whichisnotuncommonfor,
haptic cues. Fig. 7 displays the parameters and zones that
e.g., stabilized quadrotors: define the PRF. Parameters d and d are responsible
stop ahead
for extending the size of the field when the UAV is moving
V (s) 1
x
H UAVx (s)=
δ (s)
=
(0.3s+1)(0.18s+1)
(5) and are defined as [14]:
p
ψ˙(s) 1 |v|2
H UAVy (s)= δ r (s) = (0.2s+1) d stop = 2a max d ahead =|v|t ahead (6)
In addition to the above dynamics, the UAV has a maximum
Theriskfieldgeometryisdefinedbyfourconstantparameters:
velocity, V max , and acceleration, a max , of 5.0 [m/s] and r , d , t and a . The values of these parameters
pz min ahead max
1.0 [m/s2] in the longitudinal direction, and a maximum yaw
were refined through simulations for the UAV model used in
rate, ψ˙
max
, and yaw acceleration, ψ¨
max
, of 0.32 [rad/s] and
this research by Lam et al. [16] and are listed in Table II.
2.0[rad/s2]inthelateraldirection.TheUAValtitudewaskept
The risk of collision, R, is based on the relative distance
constant by an autopilot. between the UAV and an obstacle, p, also taking in account
2) Environment: Six obstacles, modeled as buildings of the instantaneous UAV velocity, v:
different shapes, see Fig. 6, made up the virtual environment
of the remote sensing task (the environment was also used in 1 if p in Zone 1
previous studies [14]). Each obstacle was designed to evoke R(p,v)= cos d π + π +1 if p in Zone 2 (7)
different control behavior. For instance, obstacle 3 required  (cid:16) d0 2 2 (cid:17)
0 if p in Zone 3
subjects to fly backwards into a U-shape building, with no
visual cues in the direction of motion. Obstacles were re- The cosine fun

ction for risk computation in Zone 2 enables a
arranged to create three different measurement and three smooth transition in risk values between zones, consequently
training trajectories, to reduce boredom and learning effects. ensuring that there will be no sudden changes in the applied
haptic moments. To evaluate the risk at point p, distances d
and d need to be computed, see Fig. 7.
0
The risk is used to compute an optimal side-stick input δ ∗.
st
First, the magnitude of the risk is calculated using Eq. (7),
and its direction is defined from the obstacle to the center of
1 2 3 the UAV. This allows for a straightforward implementation if
a discrete sensor spanning the 360 ◦ area around the UAV is
used[16].Ifmultipleobstaclesaredetected,thefinalcollision
avoidancesteeringvectoriscomputedbyvectoriallysumming
the largest and smallest collision avoidance steering vectors,
using the ‘max-min’ method [14]. Second, the resulting risk
4 5 6 vector is scaled to the physical input limits of the side-sticks
(for details see Section III-A3), i.e., the maximal risk value
corresponded to the maximal deflection of the side-stick.
Fig.6. Anexampleofavirtualenvironmentcomposedofsixobstacles;with
waypoints(starsymbols)tobeflownthrough.Apathtobeflownbackwards
TABLEII
(diamond)endsinsidetheobstacle3opening(visuallymarkedbyanasterisk).
PARAMETRICRISKFIELDPARAMETERS.
3) Parametric risk field: The parametric risk field (PRF)
Parameter Value Description
is the component of the automatic controller responsible for
mapping obstacles in the environment to the optimal collision rpz 1.5 Radiusofprotectionzone[m]
avoidance side-stick inputs, see Fig. 1. The risk field is dmin 1.5 Distancebetweenzone1andzone2[m]
computed in the UAV reference frame, expressing the risk tahead 2 Maximumavailablereactiontime[s]
of collisions for obstacles detected within the scanned area. amax 1 MaximumUAVdeceleration[m/s2]
Subsequently, in Section IV-A4, the corresponding repulsive

--- Page 8 ---

SMISEKetal.:NEUROMUSCULARSYSTEMBASEDTUNINGOFAHAPTICSHAREDCONTROLINTERFACEFORUAVTELEOPERATION 7
[7.2 0 ]
20 0 0.7
d0
Zone3
d 15 [8 0 .5 0 0 .9 ] [5 0 .6 0 0 .8 ]
Zone2 [5 0 .4 0 0 .5 ]
10
[5.0 0 ] [4.4 0 ]
Zone1 p 0 0.7 0 0.6
5
v 0 [4.9 0 ] [1 0 .5 0 0 .5 ] [4.4 0 ]
[6.0 0 ] 0 0.4 0 0.5 [6.6 0 ]
−5 0 1.7 0 0.6
rpz
−10 [4.5 0 ]
dstop dmin dahead 0 0.7
−15
Fig. 7. Parametric risk field. Variables used to describe the shape of the −20 [5.7 0 ]
parametricriskfield(basedon[14]). 0 0.7
−30 −20 −10 0 ◦ 10 20 30
δ [ ]
4) Haptic controller implementation: The haptic controller
str
(HC) was implemented using the averaged admittance of ten
subjects measured in Section III, at a measurement/excitation
signal frequency of 0.5 Hz. As discussed in Section II, ad-
mittance depends on the magnitude and direction of manual
control inputs [7], [32]. To account for this, the tuning was
determined for 13 different conditions, as is shown in Fig. 5.
The control law relating the optimal side-stick position δ ∗
st
(based on the risk calculated by Eq. (7) to the applied haptic
moment, M , was implemented according Eg. (1).
G
The motions of the UAV with respect to the obstacles in
the surroundings, and thereby the fluctuations in the haptic
feedback, will produce signals from the collision avoidance
system that are generally lower in bandwidth than 1Hz [14].
Based on the estimated frequency responses, the combination
of the NMS and the control interface can be for design
purposes considered to be a constant gain [7]. The admittance
atalowfrequency(f =0.5Hz)overallconditionsC was
1..13
transformed to stiffness:
−1
K NMS(δ
st
)= Gˆ
Ci
(f) (8)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Toaccountforallpermissiblestickinputsδ ,nearestneighbor
st
interpolation was used to compute appropriate haptic cues
(i.e., the closest available K NMS(δ
st
) to the instantaneous
teleoperator manual control input is selected). The mapping
of the instantaneous stick position δ
st
to the K NMS(δ
st
)
stiffness gains is visualized in Fig 8. It is hypothesized that
this stick position-depended tuning approach will allow the
haptic controller to better account for adaptation in NMS (in
contrast to using only one constant NMS stiffness value), and
as a consequence, improve the teleoperator’s appreciation of
the haptic cues.
By visual inspection of the identified admittance ellipses,
Fig. 5, a small roll-pitch and pitch-roll cross-term effect (i.e.,
rotation of the admittance ellipses) was observed. However,
it was deemed undesirable for the guidance forces to utilize
this cross coupling and so to prevent it, the corresponding
stiffness cross-term gains were set to zero, as: K NMS(δ st )=
KNMSp 0
.
h
0 KNMSri
B. Method
1) Subjects and task instructions: Twelve right-handed
male subjects, all graduate students of TU Delft, with an
◦
]
[
δ
pts
Fig. 8. Mapping of actual stick position δst to the tuning gain
K NMS(δst) Nmrad−1 .
(cid:2) (cid:3)
average age of 23.4 years (σ = 0.7), took part in the
experiment. None of the subjects participated in the previous
identification stage and none had any prior experience with
hapticinterfaces.Subjectgaveconsentpriortotheexperiment
and no monetary compensation was offered. The experiment
was approved by the Delft University of Technology Human
Research Ethics Committee.
During the experiment, subjects performed a UAV surveil-
lance task in an obstacle laden urban environment. Subjects
were instructed, in order of priority to: 1) avoid collisions,
2) fly as closely as possible through the center of waypoints
(represented as smoke plumes), and 3) to perform the task
as fast as possible. To improve experiment realism, each
collision resulted in a 20 second time penalty during which
the experiment was paused. Each trial took approximately
150 seconds to complete (when flown without collisions).
2) Apparatus: A fixed-base flight simulator was used to
perform the experiment, see Fig. 9. Subjects were seated in a
pilot chair (1) and used the same electro-hydraulic side-stick
withthesamedynamicalparametersasintheprecedingNMS
admittance identification experiment. The side-stick (2) was
used to manually control the UAV through the environment.
Visual cues of the surroundings were projected on a wall in
front of the subject, originating from a simulated onboard
camera fixed to the longitudinal forward axis of the UAV (4).
Additionally,atop-downviewdisplaywasprovidedtoaidthe
operator with navigating around obstacles (3).
3) Independent measures: Two categories of independent
variables were studied in the experiment. The first category
was concerned with the tuning profile (TP) of the haptic
controller. A total of four TPs were tested, resulting in the
four experiment conditions listed in Table III. Here, UT and
OT controllers represent TPs that are half and twice as strong
as RT tuning, respectively. These two TPs were defined to
study the sensitivity of the novel tuning procedure.
The second independent variable was obstacle (OB). Six
different obstacles were tested during the experiment and the
subjectswererequiredtoflythroughallofthemineverytrial,
for details see Section IV-A2.

--- Page 9 ---

8 IEEETRANSACTIONSONHUMAN-MACHINESYSTEMS
TABLEIV
EXPERIMENTDEPENDENTMEASURES.
Measure Symbol Description
Safety ncollisions Numberofcollisions[-]
V Meanvelocity[m/s]
Performance
dwp Minimumdistancetowaypoints[m]
Control Standard deviation of stick rate [rad/s],
Activity σ δ˙ bothrollandpitch
Haptic Standarddeviationofhapticguidancemo-
Activity σMG ment[Nm],bothrollandpitch
RMSerrorbetweenthemagnitudeofhu-
Haptic Mrms manappliedmomentandthehapticguid-
Controller
ancemoment[Nm]
Agreement
Msgn Ratio of haptic guidance and human ap-
Fig.9. UAVteleoperationexperimentsetup.Fixed-baseflightsimulatorwith
pliedmomentshavingthesamesign[-]
aircraftchair(1),hydraulicside-stick(2),navigationdisplay(3)andonboard
cameraview(4).
NASATLX Workloadassessmentsurvey
TABLEIII Subjective SA Situationalawarenesssurvey
UAVTELEOPERATIONEXPERIMENTCONDITIONSANDCOLORCODING.
HA Hapticfeedbackacceptancesurvey
Color Symbol Description
the roll (r) axes to investigate the control strategy differences
between the two directions observed during a pilot study.
NHF Nohapticfeedback/puremanualcontrol
Questionnaires were used to measure subjective workload,
UT HSCunder-tunedrelativetoRT(UT=0.5RT) situational awareness (SA) and haptic feedback acceptance
HSCtunedbasedonrelaxtaskadmittancedata (HA).WorkloadismeasuredusingtheNASATaskLoadIndex
RT collectedinSectionIII (TLX) questionnaire [33]. The NASA TLX calculates work-
OT HSCover-tunedrelativetoRT(OT=2RT) loadastheweightedaverageofsixsubjectivesub-scales:men-
tal demand, physical demand, temporal demand, performance,
4) Dependent measures: The dependent measures used to frustration and effort. A higher weighted average (ranging
compare the different haptic controllers can be divided into between 0 and 100), suggests higher subjective workload. SA
six categories: safety, performance, control activity, haptic and HA are measured using questionnaires similar to the Eu-
activity, haptic controller agreement and subjective question- rocontrol SASHA method [34]. These questionnaires capture
naires. They are listed in Table IV. To assess the agreement theteleoperators’awarenessoftheirsurroundingsandwhether
between the operator’s voluntary moment inputs, M , and haptic feedback was subjectively helpful in completing the
H
the haptic guidance moment, M , two separate metrics were task, respectively. The SA and HA questions are answered on
G
calculated. The metrics were calculated in discrete time, for a five point Likert type scale (ranging between 0 and 4), and
timeswhenthehapticcontrollerwasactive,i.e.,forallkwhen the mean score of all the questions is taken as the measure of
|M (k)|>0. Magnitude comparisons are based on the RMS SA and HA, with higher scores indicating higher SA/HA.
G
error between the magnitudes of measured moment and the 5) Hypotheses: Three hypotheses were formulated for the
haptic moment as: validationexperiment.Firstly,wehypothesizedthattasksafety,
in accordance with previous research [15], [16], will be
1 n increased with stronger tuning profile of the haptic controller.
M rms =v un (|M G (k)|−|M H (k)|)2, (9) Secondly, the task performance would remain unaffected
u kX=1 by the tuning profiles, since the haptic cues should ideally not
t
interfere with the task and only prevent collisions.
with smaller values indicating higher magnitude agreement.
Thirdly, the workload associated with the task and the
Directional agreement is assessed as the ratio of haptic and
acceptance of haptic feedback should be optimal for the RT.
measured moments having the same sign as:
6) Procedure: The experiment began with three initial
n
1 trainingtoallowsubjectstopracticecontrollingtheUAVwith
M = eql(sgn(M (k)),sgn(M (k))), (10)
sgn n G H and without the aid of haptic cues. Afterward, subjects flew
kX=1
one additional training run and four measurement runs for
where operator eql(a,b) equals 1 if a=b, otherwise it equals eachTP.Experimentconditionswererandomizedandsubjects
0. A M value of 1 indicates perfect agreement, whereas a had no prior knowledge of the conditions performed. At the
sgn
value of 0 indicates total disagreement of moment directions. end of each condition, subjective workload (using NASA
The control activity, haptic activity, and haptic controller TLX), situational awareness and haptic feedback acceptance
agreement were analyzed separately along the pitch (p) and were measured using questionnaires. The total duration of the

--- Page 10 ---

SMISEKetal.:NEUROMUSCULARSYSTEMBASEDTUNINGOFAHAPTICSHAREDCONTROLINTERFACEFORUAVTELEOPERATION 9
experiment,includingbriefing,debriefing,familiarizationruns,
and breaks, was approximately 2 hours.
7) Data analysis: All objective dependent measures were
computed per obstacle to take into account the different order
of obstacles in each trajectory. The effects of the independent
variables (TP and OB) on the dependent measures were
analyzedusingtwo-wayrepeated-measuresANOVA,withpair-
wise Bonferroni corrected comparisons used as post-hoc tests.
For non-spherical data the Greenhouse-Geisser corrections
were applied to the degrees of freedom [35].
Ordinaldependentmeasures,n andsubjectiveques-
collisions
tionnairesresults,wereevaluatedusingtheFriedmantest;with
Bonferroni corrected Wilcoxon signed-rank test as post-hoc.
8) Visualization of results: Results are shown using their
means and the 95% confidence intervals of the mean. The
colorcodingoftuningprofilesfollowsTableIII.Questionnaire
results are visualized as box-plots, showing the median, the
25thand75thpercentilesandthemaximalandminimalvalues
(excluding outliers) over all subjects.
Due to the low number of collisions, the n were
collisions
summed over all subjects; corresponding confidence intervals
(95%) are bootstrapped using the bias-corrected and acceler-
ated percentile method (BCa) with 5000 samples [35].
C. Results
The experimental results are in this section presented sep-
arately for all studied dependent measures. Overall, after the
initial training period, there were no learning effects observed
in the experimental data.
1) Safety: Fig.10ashowsthatthetotalnumberofcollisions,
n , decreased with increasing strength of the haptic collisions
controller, and was the lowest for the OT condition. However,
the Friedman test did not reveal a significant effect of TP on
n (TP: χ2(3)=7.48, p=0.058). collisions
The Friedman test did show an effect of OB on n , collisions
Fig. 10b, (OB: χ2(5) = 17.31, p ≤ 0.01). Obstacle 5, which
resultedinthehighestnumberofcollisions,wasalsoreported
by subjects to be the most difficult.
20
15
10
5
0 NHF UT RT OT
Tuning Profile
]-[snoisillocn
20
15
10
5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(a)ncollisionsTP
]-[snoisillocn
collisions.ThisindicatesthatsubjectsdecreasedUAVvelocity
inanattempttofollowtheprimarytaskinstructionofavoiding
collisions, particularly for difficult obstacles.
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5 1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(b)ncollisionsOB
Fig.10. Tasksafetyevaluatedseparatelyasatotalnumberofcollisionsfor
alltuningprofilesTPandobstaclesOBoverallsubjects.
2) Performance: The mean velocity of the UAV, V, is
shown in Fig. 11a. Here it can be seen that for a particular
obstacle, V was relatively constant for all haptic controllers.
On the other hand, V did vary substantially with OB, a
significant effect (OB: F =107.16,p≤0.01). When
2.39,26.29
comparing Fig. 11a with Fig. 10b, it can be seen that velocity
tends to be lower for obstacles with a higher number of
]s/m[
V
2.2
1.8
1.4
1
0.6
0.2 1 4 5 6
Obstacle
(a)V
]m[pwd
(b)dwp
Fig. 11. Task performance. Obstacles 2 and 3 did not have smoke plumes
servingaswaypoints.TPcodingisdescribedinTableIII.
Similar to V, the minimum distance to waypoints, d ,
wp
was not influenced by TP, but affected by OB (OB: F =
3,33
296.79,p≤0.01), see Fig. 11b. Moreover, it can be seen that
d followed the same trend as n and obstacles
wp collisionsOB
with more collisions had higher d . This provides additional
wp
evidencethatsubjectsemployedaconservativecontrolstrategy
when tackling difficult obstacles.
3) Control activity: The standard deviation of the longi-
tudinal side-stick deflection rate, σ , is shown in Fig. 12a.
δ˙
p For all obstacles, σ was the smallest for NHF and the
δ˙
p largest for OT (TP: F = 19.56,p ≤ 0.01). The roll
1.33,14.59
stick deflection rate σ was the lowest for obstacle 2 (OB:
δ˙
p F =42.80,p≤0.01).
1.93,21.27
Inthelateraldirection,Fig.12b,σ wasthehighestforthe
δ˙
r OT controller (TP: F = 17.57,p ≤ 0.01). Similar to the 3,33
longitudinal direction, post-hoc tests revealed no differences
between UT and RT for σ . Since turning was not necessary
δ˙
r tocompleteobstacle2,thisobstacleresultedinthelowestσ δ˙
r (OB: F =25.95,p≤0.01). 1.93,21.27
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
]s/dar[
δ˙σ
0.45
0.35
0.25
0.15
0.05
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(a)σ δ˙
p
]s/dar[
δ˙σ
(b)σ δ˙
r
2.6
2.2
1.8
1.4
1
0.6
0.2
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
]mN[
GMσ
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(c)σMGp
]mN[
GMσ
(d)σMGr
Fig.12. Controlandhapticactivity.CodingisdescribedinTableIII.

--- Page 11 ---

10 IEEETRANSACTIONSONHUMAN-MACHINESYSTEMS
4) Haptic activity: The standard deviation of the longi-
tudinal haptic guidance moment, σ , shown in Fig. 12c,
MGp
increased with increasing strength of the haptic controller
(TP: F = 75.88,p ≤ 0.01). Post-hoc tests showed 1.35,14.87
differences between all three haptic controllers (p≤0.01). In
terms of OB, variations increased from obstacle 1 to 6 (OB:
F =6.50,p≤0.05). 2.66,29.24
Standard deviation of the lateral haptic guidance moment,
σ , are much greater for obstacles 4-6 when compared to MGr
obstacles 1-3 (OB: F =9.57,p≤0.01), see Fig 12d. The 2,22
OT tuning produced the largest σ for all obstacles (TP: MGr
F =9.57,p≤0.01). Post-hoc tests showed no differences 2,22
between UT and RT controllers.
2
1.5
1
0.5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
]mN[
smrM
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(a)Mrmsp
]mN[
smrM
(b)Mrmsr
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
]1-0[
ngsM
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(c)Msgnp
]1-0[
ngsM
ofTPonM (TP:F =26.35,p≤0.01).Obstacle1and
sgn 4,44
p
3exhibitedhighdirectionalagreement,butagreementwasfell
sharply for obstacles 4-6 (OB: F =231.75,p≤0.01).
5,55
Lateral directional agreement, M , is shown in Fig. 13d. sgn
r
Itcanbeseenthatlateraldirectionalagreementis,onaverage,
greater than for the longitudinal direction. Obstacle 3 resulted
in the highest lateral directional agreement as the UAV was
required to fly backwards, forcing subjects to rely on haptic
cues to avoid obstacles outside their lateral field of view.
Obstacles 1 and 6 also resulted in much higher directional
agreementsthanotherobstacleasthesetwoobstaclesinvolved
sharp90o turnswhich,whilemakingtheturn,obscuredvisual
position of obstacles. These findings yield a significant effect
of OB on M (OB: F =76.813,p≤0.01). Concerning
sgn 5,55 r
the relationship with TP, lateral directional agreement deteri-
orated with increasing strength of the haptic controller (TP:
F =10.38,p≤0.01). 4,44
6) Subjective questionnaires: Fig. 14a displays overall
workload, orZ-score,computed usingtheNASATLXsubjec-
tive questionnaire. Here a lower subjective rating symbolizes
lower workload. The Friedman test showed that there was
an effect of TP on overall workload (TLX: χ2(3) = 18.10,
p ≤ 0.01). Post-hoc analysis revealed that the differences
were caused by the extreme conditions, NHF and OT, which
had the highest workload levels. However, no substantial
differences were recorded between UT and RT, and these
two controllers led to the lowest measured workload. The six
100 100 100
80 80 80
60 60 60
40 40 40
20 20 20
(d)Msgnr 0 NHF UT RT OT 0 NHF UT RT OT 0 NHF UT RT OT
Fig.13. Hapticcontrolleragreement.CodingisdescribedinTableIII.
(a)TLXZ (b)TLXMental (c)TLXPhysical
100 100 100
5) Haptic Controller Agreement: Longitudinal agreement
80 80 80
of the haptic moment magnitude, M , is shown in Fig. 13a. 60 60 60
rmsp
OT was found to have the highest value for M , and 40 40 40
rmsp 20 20 20
consequentlythelowestmagnitudeagreementofallcontrollers
0 0 0
NHF UT RT OT NHF UT RT OT NHF UT RT OT
(TP: F = 49.35,p ≤ 0.01). With respect to OB,
1.70,18.67 (d)TLXTemporal (e)TLXPerformance (f)TLXEffort
obstacle 1 resulted in highest magnitude agreement while it
was lowest for obstacle 6 (OB: F 2.24,24.55 = 5.45,p ≤ 0.01). 100 4 4
As the differences between controllers is more evident for ob- 80 3 3
60
stacles4-6,atwo-wayinteractionwasalsoobserved(TP×OB: 2 2
40
F 3.59,39.53 =10.99,p≤0.01). 20 1 1
For the haptic moment magnitude agreement in the lateral 0 NHF UT RT OT 0 NHF UT RT OT 0 UT RT OT
direction, M rmsr , in Fig. 13b, OT had the lowest lateral (g)TLXFrustration (h)SA (i)HA
magnitude agreement (TP: F = 13.17,p ≤ 0.01). When
4,44 Fig. 14. Subjective metrics: NASA TLX, Situational Awareness (SA), and
compared to the longitudinal direction, magnitude agreement HapticAcceptance(HA).
is higher for M . However, variations between controllers
rmsr
increase for obstacle 4-6 yielding a significant two-way inter- workload sources of the NASA TLX are pictured in Figs. 14b
action (TP×OB: F = 2.124,p ≤ 0.01), and as these to 14g. Mental load (ML) and effort (EF) for UT/RT were
20,220
three obstacle also caused lower magnitude agreement (SB: reduced compared to NHF (ML: χ2(3) = 16.20, p ≤ 0.01;
F =46.36,p≤0.01). EF: χ2(3) = 15.91, p ≤ 0.01). However, physical load
5,55
Directional agreement of longitudinal haptic moments is (PL) continued to be higher for the novel tuning method,
assessedusingM ,inFig.13c,withlargervalues implying and increased with the strength of the haptic controller, a
sgn
p
greater agreement. Highest directional agreement was found significant effect (PL: χ2(3) = 25.23, p ≤ 0.01). Despite
for UT, and the lowest for OT, resulting in a significant effect improvements in performance, frustration and temporal load

--- Page 12 ---

SMISEKetal.:NEUROMUSCULARSYSTEMBASEDTUNINGOFAHAPTICSHAREDCONTROLINTERFACEFORUAVTELEOPERATION 11
for UT/RT, TP effects were not significant. under-tuning the haptic controller (up to half the strength of
Box plots for subjective situational awareness (SA) and the relax task controller) might provide a preferred option,
haptic feedback acceptance (HA) are given in Figs. 14h sincetheoperatorneedstoactivelyagreeandcomplywiththe
and 14i. Here, higher subjective ratings imply better SA and guidance tocorrectlyfollowaprescribedtrajectory(withinga
HA. A Friedman test showed an effect of TP on SA, with range of acceptable trajectories). However, if failing to follow
the highest and lowest median SA recorded for RT and NHF thehapticguidancemightleadtoanaccident,aswithcollision
respectively (SA: χ2(3) = 11.58, p ≤ 0.01). A similar trend avoidance systems, relax task tuning presents a better alter-
was found for HA, with the highest acceptance for UT and native. Such tuning ensures a successful collision avoidance,
RT, and the lowest for OT (HA: χ2(2)=8.21, p≤0.05). unless the operator, by stiffening up, actively disagrees.
V. DISCUSSION Safety and performance alone are poor tuning metrics
The main objective of this study is to provide a system- As formulated in the first hypothesis the number of colli-
atic and validated approach for tuning Haptic Shared Con- sionswaslowerforstrongertuningprofile(TP).Theobserved
trol (HSC) systems based on estimated admittance of the decrease, Fig. 10a, however, was not found to be statistically
neuromuscular system (NMS), and – more specifically – to significant. The sample size used in this study (n = 12) was
advocate the choice of the relax task admittance as the setting higher than the minimal n = 5 for a sufficient statistical
min
with the minimal required operator workload. To this end, a power 1−β = 0.8 estimated based on effects observed in
human-in-the-loop experiment simulating UAV teleoperation somesimilarhapticcollisionavoidanceexperiments[14],[15].
wasperformedtovalidatethetuningprocedure.Thefollowing However, total n for all conditions and participants
collisions
effects were observed: in this study was substantially lower than in those previous
studies. Based on the observed effect sizes, a recommended
sample size for a future study would be n = 20. The low
NMS based tuning works as a systematic method min
n might be partially attributed to putting a strong
collisions
In general, subjective workload and situational awareness
emphasis on avoiding collisions during the task instructions
improved significantly for the under-tuned and the relax-task
and to the addition of the twenty second collision penalty.
tuned haptic controllers when compared to manual control.
Based on the results, and in accordance with the second
Additionally, over-tuning the haptic controller, as is might
hypothesis, TP had no measurable effect on performance.
be the case for heuristic tuning methods optimizing for
This may be due to subjects adapting their control strategies
safety [14], yields lower user acceptance than the condition
to ensure that task instructions are followed with similar
with no haptic support. These results indicate that including
performance for all TPs. This also suggests, that it would
UT/RTneuromuscularresponseinthehapticcontrollertuning
difficulttoselectanappropriatetuningsettingusingsafetyand
procedure indeed improves overall user acceptance.
performance metrics alone, whereas different tuning profiles
do result in other differences.
Over-tuning increases workload even over no haptic feedback
The results of the three subjective questionnaires indicate The NMS admittance identification stage can be shortened
thatacceptanceofhapticcuesincreasedforUTandRThaptic In accordance with findings of a previous study [32], the
controllers, supporting the third hypothesis. The reduction of measured admittance responses of all subjects over tested
overall NASA TLX workload for UT/RT compared to NHF conditions, Fig. 5, were similar. Moreover, the influence of
can be traced back to a reduction of mental load and effort. bias force magnitude and direction followed a similar trend
This is in sharp contrast to earlier research where haptic cues for all participants. This suggests, that to obtain a sufficient
contributed negatively towards mental load and effort [15]. setof representative admittance measurements, for instance in
Over-tuning the controller was found to be more detrimental a future practical application, a lower number of subjects and
than providing no haptic support at all. This supports the no- tested conditions could be used. The individual differences
tionthatincorrecttuningcanadverselyimpactuseracceptance in the identified NMS setting fit within the UT/RT range,
of HSC systems, and our formal tuning method provides a suggesting that there might be only little to gain in perusing
non-heuristic approach that prevents such incorrect tuning. an operator-individualized NMS tuning.
The optimal tuning range is relatively broad Haptics is appreciated when no visual feedback is available
Formostdependentvariables,nostatisticaldifferenceswere Due to the limited lateral camera field of view supplied
foundbetweentheadmittancecharacteristicsoftheunder-and during the experiment, subjects had a greater appreciation
relax-task tuned controllers; but both led to improved user for lateral haptic cues. It is interesting to note, that haptic
acceptance relative to manual control. activitydecreasedinthelateraldirection,whilecontrolactivity
The design space available for selecting an appropriate was found to be higher. Also the haptic controller agreement
tuningprofileisbroaderthanexpectedandifeitheroneshould results show that agreement between the teleoperator and the
be preferred remains an open questions. Selection between haptic controller, both in terms of magnitude and direction of
the two tunings might be task specific. For tasks where the haptic moments, was better in the lateral direction. Due to
operator should be actively involved, e.g., in car driving [5], the feedback architecture of the system, greater lateral stick

--- Page 13 ---

12 IEEETRANSACTIONSONHUMAN-MACHINESYSTEMS
motion combined with a decrease in lateral haptic activity [9] P.W.Merlin,CrashCourse:LessonsLearnedfromAccidentsInvolving
impliesthatsubjectsweremorewillingtofollowlateralhaptic Remotely Piloted and Autonomous Aircraft, ser. NASA Aeronautics
BookSeries. NationalAeronauticsandSpaceAdministration,2013.
cues.Thismaybeduetoinsufficientlateralvisualcues,forcing
[10] A. Franchi, C. Secchi, M. Ryll, H. H. Bu¨lthoff, and P. Giordano,
subjects to rely on lateral haptic moments: for obstacles with “Shared Control: Balancing Autonomy and Human Assistance with a
sharp turns (obstacles 1, 4, 5 and 6) or when visual cues from Group of Quadrotor UAVs,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine,
vol.19,no.3,pp.57–68,Sep.2012.
the camera were not in the direction of motion (obstacle 3).
[11] A. M. Brandt and M. B. Colton, “Haptic collision avoidance for a
In the longitudinal direction, however, differences between remotely operated quadrotor uav in indoor environments,” in IEEE
the provided haptic and visual cues apparently led to ‘goal’ International Conference on Systems Man and Cybernetics, Istanbul,
2010,pp.2724–2731.
related conflicts. These conflicts need to be addressed in the
[12] H.I.Son,J.Kim,L.Chuang,A.Franchi,P.Giordano,D.Lee,andH.H.
future to further improve user acceptance of HSC systems. Bu¨lthoff,“Anevaluationofhapticcuesonthetele-operator’sperceptual
Control activity was lower than in the lateral direction, which awareness of multiple UAVs’ environments,” in IEEE World Haptics
Conference,Istanbul,2011,pp.149–154.
can be attributed to the continuous corrective lateral stick
[13] S. M. Alaimo, L. Pollini, M. Innocenti, J. P. Bresciani, and H. H.
inputs required to meet the secondary objective of flying Bu¨lthoff, “Experimental comparison of direct and indirect haptic aids
through the center of waypoints. insupportofobstacleavoidanceforremotelypilotedvehicles,”Journal
of Mechanics Engineering and Automation, vol. 2, pp. 2159–5275,
2012.
VI. CONCLUSIONANDRECOMMENDATIONS
[14] T.M.Lam,“HapticinterfaceforUAVTeleoperation,”Ph.D.dissertation,
We experimentally verified the effectiveness of using a DelftUniversityofTechnology,2009.
[15] T. M. Lam, M. Mulder, and M. M. van Paassen, “Haptic Interface
formal tuning method for haptic shared controllers, based
For UAV Collision Avoidance,” The International Journal of Aviation
on relax-task setting of the neuromuscular system. For the Psychology,vol.17,no.2,pp.167–195,2007.
studied conditions, we conclude that: 1) tuning based on [16] T. M. Lam, H. W. Boschloo, M. Mulder, and M. M. van Paassen,
“ArtificialForceFieldforHapticFeedbackinUAVTeleoperation,”IEEE
safety and performance metrics alone would be difficult and
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and
the neuromuscular knowledge should be included; 2) tuning Humans,vol.39,no.6,pp.1316–1330,2009.
based on the relax task NMS setting was appreciated by the [17] D. A. Abbink, D. Cleij, M. Mulder, and M. M. van Paassen, “The
importance of including knowledge of neuromuscular behaviour in
operators, with both physical and mental workload reduced;
hapticsharedcontrol,”inSystems,Man,andCybernetics(SMC),2012
3) this tuning optimum is; however, not sharp and both the IEEEInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2012,pp.3350–3355.
under-tuned and the relax-task-tuned systems behaved equally [18] D.A.AbbinkandM.Mulder,“Neuromuscularanalysisasaguideline
well in the tested conditions and thus the requirements for the in designing shared control,” Advances in haptics, vol. 109, pp.
499–516,2010.
identification procedure could be reduced; 4) haptic feedback
[19] E. Sunil, “Tuning of a haptic collision avaoidance system for UAV
is most effective in directions with limited visual feedback; 5) teleoperation: Preliminary Report,” Faculty of Aerospace Engineering,
in contrast, haptic feedback provided in the forward direction, TUDelft,Delft,Preliminary,Aug.2013.
[20] D.A.Abbink,“NeuromuscularAnalysisofHapticGasPedalFeedback
where the operator had a good view, was more often opposed
during Car Following,” PhD, Delft University of Technology, Delft,
by the operators. Ways to minimize these conflicts should be 2006.
investigated in future research. [21] E.DeVlugt,“IdentificationofSpinalReflexes,”Ph.D.dissertation,Delft
UniversityofTechnology,Delft,2004.
[22] W.Mugge,D.A.Abbink,A.C.Schouten,J.P.A.Dewald,andF.C.T.
REFERENCES
van der Helm, “A rigorous model of reflex function indicates that
[1] P.G.GriffithsandR.B.Gillespie,“SharingControlBetweenHumans position and force feedback are flexibly tuned to position and force
and Automation Using Haptic Interface: primary and secondary task tasks,” Experimental Brain Research, vol. 200, no. 3-4, pp. 325–340,
performance benefits,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Jan.2010.
FactorsandErgonomicsSociety,vol.47,no.3,pp.574–590,2005. [23] M.D.Penna,M.M.VanPaassen,D.Abbi,M.Mulder,M.Mulder,and
[2] D. A. Abbink, M. Mulder, and E. R. Boer, “Haptic shared control: others, “Reducing steering wheel stiffness is beneficial in supporting
smoothly shifting control authority?” Cognition, Technology & Work, evasive maneuvers,” in Systems Man and Cybernetics (SMC), 2010
vol.14,no.1,pp.19–28,2012. IEEEInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2010,pp.1628–1635.
[3] G.Baxter,J.Rooksby,Y.Wang,andA.Khajeh-Hosseini,“Theironies [24] T.Tsuji,P.G.Morasso,K.Goto,andK.Ito,“Humanhandimpedance
of automation: still going strong at 30?” in Proceedings of the 30th characteristics during maintained posture,” Biological Cybernetics,
European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics, Edinburgh, 2012, pp. vol.72,no.6,pp.475–485,1995.
65–71. [25] W.Mugge,D.A.Abbink,andF.C.T.vanderHelm,“Reducedpower
[4] M. Olivari, F. M. Nieuwenhuizen, H. H. Bu¨lthoff, and L. Pollini, method: how to evoke low-bandwidth behaviour while estimating full-
“Pilot Adaptation to Different Classes of Haptic Aids in Tracking bandwidth dynamics,” in International Conference on Rehabilitation
Tasks,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 37, no. 6, Robotics,Noordwijk,2007,pp.575–581.
pp.1741–1753,Nov.2014. [26] A. Schouten, E. de Vlugt, and F. van der Helm, “Design of
[5] D. A. Abbink and M. Mulder, “Exploring the Dimensions of Haptic Perturbation Signals for the Estimation of Proprioceptive Reflexes,”
Feedback Support in Manual Control,” Journal of Computing and IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 55, no. 5, pp.
InformationScienceinEngineering,vol.9,no.1,p.011006,2009. 1612–1619,May2008.
[6] D. A. Abbink, M. Mulder, F. C. T. van der Helm, M. Mulder, and [27] J.S.BendatandA.G.Piersol,Randomdata:analysisandmeasurement
E. R. Boer, “Measuring Neuromuscular Control Dynamics During Car procedures,2nded. NewYork:Wiley,1986.
Following With Continuous Haptic Feedback,” IEEE Transactions on [28] F.C.T.vanderHelm,A.C.Schouten,E.DeVlugt,andG.G.Brown,
Systems,Man,andCybernetics,PartB:Cybernetics,vol.41,no.5,pp. “Identification of intrinsic and reflexive components of human arm
1239–1249,Oct.2011. dynamics during postural control,” Journal of Neuroscience Methods,
[7] J. Smisek, M. M. van Paassen, M. Mulder, and D. A. Abbink, vol.119,no.1,pp.1–14,2002.
“Neuromuscular analysis based tuning of haptic shared control [29] E.J.Perreault,R.F.Kirsch,andP.E.Crago,“Effectsofvoluntaryforce
assistanceforUAVcollisionavoidance,”inWorldHapticsConference, generationontheelasticcomponentsofendpointstiffness,”Experimen-
2013,pp.389–394. talBrainResearch,vol.141,no.3,pp.312–323,2001.
[8] E. Sunil, J. Smisek, M. M. van Paassen, and M. Mulder, “Validation [30] J.Smisek,E.Sunil,M.M.V.Paassen,D.A.Abbink,andM.Mulder,
of a tuning method for haptic shared control using neuromuscular “Humanoperatorlimbneuromuscularadmittanceidentifiedonaspring-
systemanalysis,”inSystems,ManandCybernetics(SMC),2014IEEE centered control interface,” [Dataset], DOI: 10.4121/uuid:cb7ddb1c-
InternationalConferenceon. IEEE,2014,pp.1499–1504. 0bda-4434-a0b6-e8a31a071ac7,TUDelft,2016.

--- Page 14 ---

SMISEKetal.:NEUROMUSCULARSYSTEMBASEDTUNINGOFAHAPTICSHAREDCONTROLINTERFACEFORUAVTELEOPERATION 13
[31] B.H.Krogh,“Ageneralizedpotentialfieldapproachtoobstacleavoid- MaxMulderreceivedtheM.Sc.andPh.D.degrees
ancecontrol,”SocietyofManufactuingEngineers,Tech.Rep.,1984. (cumlaude)inaerospaceengineeringfromtheDelft
[32] J.Lasschuit,T.Lam,M.Mulder,M.M.vanPaassen,andD.A.Abbink, University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands,
“MeasuringandModelingNeuromuscularSystemDynamicsforHaptic in1992and1999,respectively,withafocusonthe
Interface Design,” in AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies cyberneticsoftunnel-in-the-skydisplays.Heiscur-
Conference,Honolulu,2008. rentlyaFullProfessorandtheHeadoftheControl
[33] S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland, “Development of NASA-TLX (Task andSimulationDivision,FacultyofAerospaceEngi-
Load Index): Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research,” Human neering,DelftUniversityofTechnology.Hiscurrent
MentalWorkload,vol.1,no.3,pp.139–183,1988. researchinterestsincludecyberneticsanditsusein
[34] E. Jeannot, C. Kelly, and D. Thompson, The development of situation modeling human perception and performance, and
awarenessmeasuresinATMsystems. Brussels:Eurocontrol,2003. cognitivesystemsengineeringanditsapplicationin
[35] A. Field, Discovering Statistics using IBM SPSS Statistics. London: thedesignof“ecological”human–machineinterfaces.
Sage,2013.
JanSmisek(S’14)receivedtheM.Sc.degree(cum
laude) in Systems and Control from the Czech
TechnicalUniversityinPrague,CzechRepublic,in
2011. Currently, he is working towards the Ph.D.
degree at the Delft University of Technology, the
Netherlands. He is also a Robotics Engineer at the
Telerobotics and Haptics lab, with the European
Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC)
of the European Space Agency (ESA), situated in
Noordwijk, the Netherlands. His research interests
includeteleoperationandsharedautonomy.
Emmanuel Sunil received the M.Sc. degree in
AerospaceEngineering(cumlaude)fromTUDelft
in 2014, for his work on a haptic interface for
unmanned aircraft collision avoidance. During his
M.Sc. program, he did an internship at the Max
Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics in Tub-
ingen, Germany. He is currently working as Ph.D.
studentattheControlandSimulationsectionofthe
faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft. His
research focuses on airspace design, airborne sep-
arationassuranceandairspacecapacitymodeling.
DavidA.Abbink(M’12–SM’14)receivedtheM.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from
the Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands, in 2002 and 2006, respectively. He is
an Associate Professor with the Delft Haptics Lab-
oratory,DelftUniversityofTechnology.Hiscurrent
research interests include neuromuscular behavior,
driversupportsystems,andhaptics.Dr.Abbinkisan
associateeditoroftheIEEETransactionsonHuman-
MachineSystem.
MarinusM.(Rene´)vanPaassen(M’08–SM’15)re-
ceivedtheM.Sc.degree(cumlaude)fromtheDelft
University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands,
in 1988, and a Ph.D. in 1994, both on studies into
the neuromuscular system of the pilot’s arm. He
is an associate professor in Aerospace Engineering
at the Delft University of Technology, working on
human machine interaction and aircraft simulation.
Hisworkonhuman-machineinteractionrangesfrom
studies of perceptual processes, haptics and haptic
interfaces and human manual control to design of
and interaction with complex cognitive systems. Rene´ is a senior member
of IEEE and of AIAA, and an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on
Human-MachineSystem.
View publication stats