

--- Page 1 ---

Noise computation for future urban
air traffic systems
Customer
National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
NLR-TP-2015-289 - July 2015

--- Page 2 ---

National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
Anthony Fokkerweg 2
1059 CM Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Tel +31 (0)88 511 3113
www.nlr.nl

--- Page 3 ---

UNCLASSIFIED
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Noise computation for future
urban air traffic systems
Report no.
NLR-TP-2015-289
Author(s)
M. Arntzen
R. Aalmoes
F.J.L. Bussink
E. Sunil
J. Hoekstra
Report classification
UNCLASSIFIED
Date
Problem area
July 2015
The increasing popularity of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
Knowledge area(s)
and Personal Air Vehicles (PAVs) is hypothesized to lead to a
Aircraft Noise
change of future urban environments. Within the EU Metropolis
project, future air traffic systems are designed to cope with the Descriptor(s)
Future urban noise
expected high amount of traffic. This report describes the
RPAS
expected noise impact for the different air space design concepts.
Air traffic system
Description of work
Within the EU Metropolis project, four different air space design
concepts are studied: a Full Mix scenario, a Layered concept, a
Zonal concept and a Tubes concept. Each concept commands a
different way of navigating a vehicle through the urban
environment without colliding in other UAVs or PAVs. Since the
noise impact of such aircraft is yet unknown, or not disclosed by
manufacturers, source noise levels were assumed to equal levels
that are maximally allowed by the FAA. This is a crude
approximation but allows to make a first assessment on the noise
impact. Furthermore, the decay of sound levels as function of
distance was modelled using NPD-curves from INM.
This report is based on a presentation to be held at the Internoise conference, 9-12 august
UNCLASSIFIED in San Francisco (USA), 2015.

--- Page 4 ---

N oise computation for future urban air traffic systems UNCLASSIFIED
Results and conclusions
Since a lot of traffic was simulated, the noise model was tailored
to be fast. All individual flights were calculated on a relevant grid
part of the urban environment. These results were accumulated
to generate the overall noise impact expressed in LDEN footprints
and noise contours. The footprints showed the basic structure of
each airspace design concept. For instance, the zonal concept
displayed clear radials and circular arcs along which the sound
levels would intensify. The tubes concept spreads out the sound
very evenly, although it results were hampered by air traffic
capacity issues. The full mix and layered concept provided the
least noise nuisance on the ground. The layered concept
outperformed the full mix concept slightly in terms of noise
exposure on the ground.
Applicability
The demonstrated methodology can be used to assess future air
traffic noise environments in high density traffic situations. The
results show that a careful design of the airspace structure can
control noise nuisance in futuristic urban environments.
National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
Anthony Fokkerweg 2, 1059 CM Amsterdam,
P.O. Box 90502, 1006 BM Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Telephone +31 (0)88 511 31 13, Fax +31 (0)88 511 32 10, www.nlr.nl UNCLASSIFIED

--- Page 5 ---

Noise computation for future
urban air traffic systems
M. Arntzen, R. Aalmoes, F.J.L. Bussink, E. Sunil1 and
J. Hoekstra1
1 TU Delft
Customer
National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
July 2015

--- Page 6 ---

Noise computation for future urban air traffic systems
This report is based on a presentation to be held at the Internoise conference, 9-12 august in San Francisco
(USA), 2015.
The contents of this report may be cited on condition that full credit is given to NLR and the authors.
Customer National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
Contract number 2043107
Owner European Commission
Division NLR Air Transport
Distribution Unlimited
Classification of title Unclassified
Date July 2015
Approved by:
Author Reviewer Managing department
M. Arntzen D. Bergmans F.J.J.M. Hermans
Date Date Date
2 | NLR-TP-2015-289

--- Page 7 ---

Content
1 Introduction 5
2 Study setup 6
2.1 Traffic 6
2.2 Source Noise Levels 7
2.3 Propagation Transmission Loss 7
2.4 Noise Metrics 8
3 Results & Discussion 8
4 Conclusions 11
5 Acknowledgements 12
6 References 12
NLR-TP-2015-289 | 3

--- Page 8 ---

Noise computation for future urban air traffic systems
Noise computation for future urban air traffic systems
Michael Arntzena)
Roalt Aalmoes
Environment & Policy support department, NLR
Anthony Fokkerweg 2, 1059 CM, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Frank Bussink
Cockpit & Flight Operations, NLR
Anthony Fokkerweg 2, 1059 CM, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Emmanuel Sunil
Jacco Hoekstra
Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management, TU Delft
Kluyverweg 1, 2629 HS, Delft, the Netherlands
The development of Personal aerial vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles are expected to
have a considerable influence on the development of future airspace design around large
cities. In the Metropolis project, four different concepts for airspace design are assessed for
a (metropolitan) city of the future. The different noise impact on the ground is addressed in
this paper. The noise model is based on the maximum allowable source noise levels as
proposed by the Federal Aviation Authority, as actual noise data from the considered
aircraft is not available. Transmission loss has been modelled using Noise-Power-Distance
relations from the Integrated Noise Model. The resulting noise model shows remarkable
different noise footprints between the four concepts and between different traffic patterns,
which included both converging and diverging flows. The layered airspace structure
provided the lowest noise impact on the ground.
a) Email: Michael.arntzen@nlr.nl, also affiliated with the Aircraft Noise & Climate Effects group of the TU Delft.
4 | NLR-TP-2015-289

--- Page 9 ---

1 INTRODUCTION
The popularity and availability of Unmanned and Personal Aerial Vehicles (UAVs and
PAVs) has increased in the past years. Furthermore, these means of transportation have been
proposed as alternatives for road traffic and may become more common in a future air
transportation system. This leads to the question if the airspace can accommodate a large number
of these flying vehicles safely. Within the Metropolis project (EU FP7) four different airspace
structure concepts were designed and put to the test in rather extreme traffic densities [1]. Each
concept uses a Self-Separation system to allow each vehicle execute conflict detection and
resolution, i.e. safe flight. However, the different airspace concepts generate, even with the same
source and destinations for the traffic, very different movements in the air.
The first concept is the ‘Full Mix’ (FM) concept, which uses an unstructured airspace. Each
individual vehicle is allowed to find its own path towards its destination. This can be a very
efficient structure since each vehicle is allowed to fly a direct path between the origin and
destination. Aircraft are also allowed to fly at their optimum altitude.
The second concept is the ‘Layered’ (LAY) concept and can be regarded as an extension of
the hemispheric rules [2]. The LAY concept creates horizontal layers (300 ft. high) of airspace in
which flights are only allowed in a particular direction separated by 45 degrees of heading, i.e.
layer 1 from 0-45 degree, layer 2 from 45-90 degrees, etcetera. See figure 1 (left) for an
illustration of this concept. Thus, aircraft have to base their altitude (and also efficiency) based
on their heading. However, within each layer the aircraft are headed in the same direction which
theoretically leads to fewer conflicts.
The third concept is the ‘Zonal’ concept (ZON). Within the ZON concept there are multiple
rings, similar to city-rings allowing road traffic nowadays, around the city center of Metropolis.
On these rings the traffic is allowed either to travel either a clockwise or anti-clockwise
direction. There are inbound and outbound radials that lead traffic from and to the rings. The
altitude of the vehicles is chosen by the vehicles themselves. See figure 1 (middle) for an
illustration of this concept.
The final, fourth concept, is the ‘Tubes’ concept (TUB). Within the TUB concept, the
vehicles are assigned a 4-D tube in which they have to fly to reach their destination. The tubes at
the same altitude do not intersect except at nodes, in which aircraft are allowed to travel in
vertical and horizontal direction. In TUB all aircraft are a-priori de-conflicted by ground
automation. See figure 1 (right) for an illustration of this concept.
Fig. 1 - Impressions of the LAY concept (left), the ZON concept (middle) and TUB concept
(right).
NLR-TP-2015-289 | 5

--- Page 10 ---

Noise computation for future urban air traffic systems
Hence, airspace concepts range from unstructured FM via LAY and ZON to the most
structured TUB concept. Besides safety [3] and efficiency related parameters, as part of the
environmental impact study, the noise impact was also considered. To calculate the noise level
on the ground, information about the source noise level of each aircraft and associated
propagation transmission loss is necessary. This information and noise calculations are typically
implemented with noise assessment models such as the Integrated Noise Model (INM) [4].
The Metropolis vehicles are not integrated in INM. Hence, a dedicated analysis was
executed (similar to the approach of INM) to assess the noise impact. The resulting model should
not be considered to predict the exact absolute noise levels of these futuristic scenarios due to
constraints on available information. However, it does provide an indication of the differences in
noise impact of the four airspace design concepts. This paper highlights the results from the
noise study of the Metropolis project.
2 STUDY SETUP
2.1 Traffic
The simulated Metropolis area was based on present-day Paris, i.e. 40x40 nautical miles.
While traffic was simulated for the entire area, environmental metrics were logged for a smaller
‘experimental area’ of 448 NM2. The actual traffic was simulated using the Traffic Manager
(TMX) software from the NLR [5]. To simulate some of the ‘real-world’ intricacies, some
random parameters such as wind and rogue aircraft (aircraft that did not conform to the airspace
routing) were added.
Different day-time periods and traffic densities have been simulated in the Metropolis
project. The traffic pattern for morning, lunch and evening flights were severely different due to
traffic headed to the city center (morning) or the other way around (evening). PAV traffic
densities were also varied from low (2625 movements), medium (3375 movements), high (4125
movements) to ultra (4875 movements). These movements are averaged instantaneous traffic
volumes. The UAV traffic volume per hour can be considered (roughly) as half of the reported
PAV values.
The Metropolis project considered four vehicles, one UAV and three PAVs. The UAV is
projected to be 2 meter in diameter and capable of carrying up to five average-sized packages for
delivery of goods. Only the three PAVs were taken into account for the current noise analysis
and were one (heavy) tilt-rotor vehicle, considered to be an alternative to a bus, and two light-
weight ‘flying cars’, considered to be alternatives to either a car or a motorcycle. UAV
movements are expected to occur only for short-ranges and where, consequently, in all four
concepts allowed to operate by the FM ‘rules’. Hence, the UAVs trajectories were similar for all
four concepts and are thus ignored in assessing the four concepts.
The individual trajectories of each flight were analyzed and sorted. Parts of the flight
trajectory below 1650ft were ignored: below that altitude the aircraft are landing or taking-off
and are ignoring the airspace design concept rules. Therefore, it does not make a difference for
the evaluation of these concepts if these movements are removed from the comparison.
Figure 2 shows the simulated topology of the aircraft trajectories. The FM and LAY concept
show rather similar trajectories, although notice that for the LAY concept the aircraft tend to fly
at a higher altitude. The TUB concept shows a rather different structure, individual tubes can be
picked out. The ZON concept show the circular arcs that aircraft fly on the clockwise and anti-
clockwise rings.
6 | NLR-TP-2015-289

--- Page 11 ---

Fig. 2 - The individual trajectories plotted for the four concepts. (FM: upper left, LAY: upper
right, TUB: lower left and ZON, lower right; Red: tiltrotor, Blue and Green are flying cars)
2.2 Source Noise Levels
The source noise levels for the considered vehicles are unknown or not disclosed by their
manufacturers. Hence, the FAA regulation [5, fig K4] for certification of tiltrotor aircraft was
used to indicate the maximum allowable source noise level for the three aircraft. These sound
levels depend on the maximum take-off weight of the aircraft. Consequently, the tiltrotor had
higher source noise level (9-10 dB) than the two ‘flying cars’.
These certification noise values are prescribed in the EPNdB noise metric. However, for
our analysis the LAmax noise metric needs to be known and implied that a conversion was
necessary. Hence, the certification values were converted to LAmax by using the difference in
EPNdB and LAmax as found in INM’s Noise-Power-Distance (NPD) relations.
2.3 Propagation Transmission Loss
Noise levels decay as a function of distance during propagation by a transmission loss.
Such a transmission loss is in INM inherently included in the NPD relations. A similar approach
was created for the current analysis by adopting the noise decay trend from existing NPD
relations. The tiltrotor used the NPD trend from a heavy (S-76) helicopter whereas the ‘flying
cars’ were given the NPD trend belonging to a small aircraft (DA-20). The source noise
dependency of each aircraft on thrust was not modeled due to uncertainty regarding the aircraft
NLR-TP-2015-289 | 7

--- Page 12 ---

Noise computation for future urban air traffic systems
noise production and a lack of data. Hence, the maximum allowed source noise from certification
was thus taken, i.e. a worst case scenario. The noise impact is calculated for the ground-level, not
the city high-rise (flat ground), to reduce the complexity in the calculations.
2.4 Noise Metrics
Three noise metrics were assessed:
1. Time in specific altitude band
2. Number Above 55 dB(A) contour (N55)
3. LDEN noise footprints and contour area (70 LDEN)
The first, time based, metric provides an assessment of the differences in time spend at
specific altitudes. The idea is that whilst the aircraft is at a higher altitude, the nuisance on the
ground is minimized.
The N55 metric provides an indication on how audible the flyover events are. If the sound
on the ground (LAmax) is more than 55 dB(A), the individual aircraft is assumed to be audible.
Although higher values as limit could have been chosen, the 55 dB(A) limit is selected to
balance a lower city background noise level and tonality that these aircraft (especially
tiltrotors/propellers) are expected to exhibit. Contours are drawn for 400 events, i.e. 400 events
where the noise level exceeded 55 dB(A), and the corresponding contour area is assessed.
The LDEN is a noise metric measuring the cumulative effect of each individual flight
passing through the experimental area. An LDEN footprint visualizes differences between the
concepts and daytime periods. The day-evening-night multiplier of the LDEN metric is set to
equal (day-time) events to allow a fair comparison between the time periods.
3 RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Results were examined for the different periods in the simulation: Morning, Lunch (middle
of the day), and Evening. Figure 3 shows the resulting footprints for the morning scenario in case
of the ultimate traffic density.
The difference between the four concepts shown in Figure 3 is remarkable. The FM and
LAY concept show a similar noise footprint pattern whereas the TUB and ZON concept show a
footprint that is very different. In the TUB concept, the individual tubes can be picked out in the
noise footprint whereas in the ZON footprint the circular arcs and radials are distinguishable.
The noise footprint of the TUB concept lacks the distinctive high intensity at the origin
(city center) but spreads noise more evenly. Since the number of flights accommodated by the
TUB concept is lower than the others, due to capacity constraints, its results are not further
analyzed in detail here because such a comparison is unfair.
Differences between the FM and LAY concept include the lack of the high intensity area at
the origin in the LAY concept. This can be caused by aircraft that need to ascend/descend
quicker, compared to the FM concept, to reach a particular altitude/heading layer combination.
This results in aircraft that fly at higher altitudes in the layer concept than in the FM concept and
thus a reduced noise level at ground level. This also shows in the time metric results later in this
section.During lunch-time in the scenario, the characteristics of each concept are retained. It
seems that the only (slight) difference is that noise is reduced further away from the city center.
Due to the small deviations, the figures for the lunch-time characteristics are not presented in this
document. Figure 4 illustrates the results for the evening.
8 | NLR-TP-2015-289

--- Page 13 ---

Fig. 3 - The LDEN footprints for the four airspace concepts for the morning (ultimate traffic
density) scenario.
Fig. 4 - The LDEN footprints for the four airspace concepts for the evening (ultimate traffic
density) scenario.
NLR-TP-2015-289 | 9

--- Page 14 ---

Noise computation for future urban air traffic systems
If examined more closely, t here are differences between the morning (Figure 3) and
evening scenario (Figure 4). The noise footprints of the FM and LAY concept show that more
noise is present further away from the city. The LAY concept shows as well a small focus of
noise near the city center.
However, the largest difference can be found for the ZON concept. The radials are more ‘lit
up’ in the noise footprint, indicating higher noise levels that also extend to the edge of the
experiment area. Moreover, the noise level is higher near the city center.
In essence, there are differences between the morning, lunch or evening scenario. The
largest differences can be found between the morning and evening scenario but the characteristic
noise footprint of each concept does not change dramatically during the time of the day. This is
also observed for lower traffic densities, which was not included here for brevity.
To quantify all the noise metrics, the N55 and LDEN footprints were converted into
contours depicting a specific value, i.e. a contour where N55 equals 400 events and the 70 LDEN
contour. The area enclosed by such a contour can be compared between the concepts. Such
results are shown in table 1 for low and ultimate traffic densities.
Table 1: A quantification of the contour areas for N55 and LDEN and the time spend below
2000 ft. and above 4000 ft.
N55 - 400 70 LDEN t <2000 ft. t >4000 ft.
Concept Density km2 km2 hours hours
Morning FM Low 24 0 142 209
LAY Low 3 0 125 317
TUB Low 0 1 295 236
ZON Low 190 56 107 248
Morning FM Ult 477 229 290 387
LAY Ult 417 207 251 572
TUB Ult 176 685 644 345
ZON Ult 968 389 240 461
Evening FM Low 106 5 143 210
LAY Low 66 0 128 323
TUB Low 0 0 207 169
ZON Low 228 79 110 222
Evening FM Ult 525 352 308 419
LAY Ult 464 304 290 616
TUB Ult 3 75 524 285
ZON Ult 821 481 335 514
Table 1 illustrates the results of the different concepts. Results for lunch time, medium and high
densities have been left out for the sake of brevity. Furthermore, notice that the majority of the
TUB concept has been greyed out. This is due to the fact that the amount of flights used in that
concept was too low due to capacity constraints. As a result, these particular scenarios cannot be
used in a comparison since the resulting noise impact is much lower.
10 | NLR-TP-2015-289

--- Page 15 ---

There are several interesting observations resulting from table 1, amongst others:
 The contour area of the N55 and LDEN metric of the LAY concept is the lowest (a
smaller noise impact) for all daytime periods and densities if the TUB concept is ignored.
 The differences between the contour area for the FM and LAY concept are reduced for a
higher traffic density.
 It is noticed that the LAY concept spends less time below 2000 ft. and more time above
4000 ft. This is beneficial for noise impact since noise impact on the ground is lower at
higher altitudes. (this explains why the LAY contours are smaller than the FM ones)
 The ZON concept spends, for the majority of occasions, the least time below 2000 ft. but
also exhibits, quite contradicting, the largest LDEN and N55 contour.
It should be noted that in the current analysis, the ZON concept accommodated more flights (7%
more) than the FM and LAY concept. This difference is not large enough to explain the larger
contour area found of the ZON concept compared to the FM or LAY.
4 CONCLUSIONS
The current noise methodology is based on the regulatory limitation for tiltrotor noise to
predict the source noise levels. As such, the absolute levels are likely to be off compared to the
case when these vehicles would actually fly. However, it does allow evaluating differences that
may be expected for the airspace design concept.
Based on the LDEN footprints shown in figures 3 and 4 it is concluded that the spreading of
the total amount of sound is different between the airspace concepts. The FM and LAY concept
spread the noise impact very similar and show higher intensities near the busy origin (Metropolis
center). Quite different is the footprint of the TUB concept that shows a very uniform spreading
of noise over the grid. The ZON concept is again different as it shows higher sound intensities
along the radials and circular arcs limiting the zones. In that sense, the ZON concept could be
useful to dispense sound in particular areas of Metropolis.
Based on the observations of table 1 it becomes clear that the LAY concept offers the
smallest contour areas. The reported differences between the FM and LAY concept become
smaller for higher traffic intensity. The fact that the LAY concept offers smaller noise contours
than the FM concept can be associated with the fact that less time is being spent below 2000 ft.
The TUB concept could not be quantified extensively due to the lower number of flights
accommodated by that airspace concept. It remains unknown what the absolute noise levels
would be if the same amount of traffic could have been accommodated. The ZON concept shows
that, despite the least time spend below 2000 ft., that its contour areas is larger than that of the
FM and LAY concept.
Hence, the TUB and ZON concept exhibit characteristic footprints that are either uniformly
spread (TUB) or condensed along radials and arcs (ZON). Footprints resulting from the LAY
and FM concept are very similar. Based on the absolute size of the noise contours it is concluded
that the LAY concept provides the lowest noise impact on the ground of the current Metropolis
city.
NLR-TP-2015-289 | 11

--- Page 16 ---

Noise computation for future urban air traffic systems
5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research received funding from the Seventh Framework Programme of the European
Commission under grant number 341508 (Metropolis).
From the Metropolis project, the authors would like to thank Oliver Schneider, and Stefan
Kern (both DLR), professor Daniel Delahaye, Georges Mykoniatis, and Andrija Vidosavljevic
(all from ENAC), Joost Ellerbroek (TU Delft), and Dennis Nieuwenhuisen, Marieke
Suijkerbuijk, and Pim van Leeuwen (all NLR) for their contribution for concept and scenario
definition, and the simulation tracks that are used in the noise calculations.
6 REFERENCES
1. Metropolis: Relating Airspace Structure and Capacity for Extreme Traffic Densities, ´E.
Sunil, J. Hoekstra, J. Ellerbroek, F. Bussink, D. Nieuwenhuisen, A. Vidosavljevic, S. Kern,
11th USA/Europe ATM R&D seminar (ATM 2015).
2. Rules of the air, ICAO, Annex 2, July 2005.
3. A conceptual third party risk model for personal and unmanned aerial vehicles, R. Aalmoes,
Y.S. Cheung, E. Sunil, J. Hoekstra, F. Bussink, ICUAS15, 6-9 June, Denver USA, 2015.
4. Integrated Noise Model (INM) Version 7.0 Technical Manual, FAA-AEE-08-01, January
2008.
5. Traffic manager: a flexible desktop simulation tool enabling future ATM research, F.
Bussink, J. Hoekstra, B. Heesbeen, Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), 2005, vol
1. P 3-B.
6. Noise Certification Standards for Tiltrotors, FAA- 2013-00111, 78 FR 1133, January 2013.
(https://federalregister.gov/a/2013-00111)
12 | NLR-TP-2015-289

--- Page 17 ---

WHAT IS NLR?
The NLR is a Dutch organisation that identifies, develops and applies high-tech knowledge in the
aerospace sector. The NLR’s activities are socially relevant, market-orientated, and conducted
not-for-profit. In this, the NLR serves to bolster the government’s innovative capabilities, while
also promoting the innovative and competitive capacities of its partner companies.
The NLR, renowned for its leading expertise, professional approach and independent consultancy, is
staffed by client-orientated personnel who are not only highly skilled and educated, but also
continuously strive to develop and improve their competencies. The NLR moreover possesses an
impressive array of high quality research facilities.
NLR – Dedicated to innovation in aerospace

--- Page 18 ---

www.nlr.nl