

--- Page 1 ---

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/3997814
Research flight simulation of future autonomous aircraft operations
Conference Paper · January 2003
DOI: 10.1109/WSC.2002.1166382 · Source: IEEE Xplore
CITATIONS READS
10 105
4 authors, including:
Bart Heesbeen
Netherlands Aerospace Centre - NLR
9 PUBLICATIONS 87 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Bart Heesbeen on 09 February 2023.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- Page 2 ---

Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simulation Conference
E. Yücesan, C.-H. Chen, J. L. Snowdon, and J. M. Charnes, eds.
RESEARCH FLIGHT SIMULATION OF FUTURE AUTONOMOUS AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
Mario S.V. Valenti Clari
Rob C.J. Ruigrok
Bart W.M. Heesbeen
Jaap Groeneweg
National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
Anthony Fokkerweg 2, PO Box 90502
1006 BM Amsterdam, THE NETHERLANDS
ABSTRACT defined standards. The compromise between realism and
flexibility makes the research flight simulator the ideal
A key element in the development and innovation of future platform for prototyping of new concepts, procedures and
aviation concepts and systems is research flight simulation. systems. This implies that generic systems in the research
Research flight simulation is applied when the perform- flight simulator can ultimately influence real aircraft de-
ance and perception of human pilots is a key measure of velopment and thus also training simulators.
the overall assessment. This paper will give an overview of Over the last decades the continuous global growth of
the research simulation set-up of the National Aerospace air traffic has led to increasing problems with respect to air-
Laboratory (NLR), Amsterdam, the Netherlands, which is space capacity and delays. This situation has initiated the re-
used for the human-in-the-loop evaluation of future opera- search for new operational concepts and aircraft systems that
tional concepts. Special attention is given to the research aim for more independent aircraft operations in so-called
topic of Airborne Separation Assurance; often referred to Free Flight traffic environment. In order to aid this research,
as Free Flight. The presented set-up has proven to be a flight simulation is often applied to probe the human factors
flexible evaluation tool for assessing human-in-the-loop of pilots when operating in simulated Free Flight environ-
performance when operating in a simulated future autono- ments using new avionics installed in the simulated aircraft.
mous aircraft environment. The discussion in this paper will be based on the research
experiences of the authors at the National Aerospace Labo-
1 INTRODUCTION ratory (NLR), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
This paper will discuss research flight simulation and
Simulation is a useful tool for aviation research. Simula- how it can contribute to the future of aviation, particularly
tion has evolved and matured over the last forty years in the way aircraft are operated in a future air traffic system.
equal pace with developments in the aerospace industry. The next section will discuss in more detail the research for
One particular fascinating application of simulation for autonomous aircraft operations. Subsequently, a state-of-
aviation research is real-time flight simulation. Real-time the-art simulation set-up will be described that has been
flight simulation allows pilots to fly in simulated condi- used for recent “Free Flight” projects at NLR. Important
tions, without the costs and safety issues that go with per- components of the set-up will be described on a high-level.
forming real flight.
When flight simulation and research are combined, the 2 AUTONOMOUS AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
objective is to measure the human performance in the
simulated environment. Research will pose certain re- Due to the continuous growth of air traffic over the last
quirements on the simulation hardware and software used; decades, the current Air Traffic Control (ATC) system is
it requires generic tools that can be adjusted to the evolving approaching its capacity limits. The capacity limit of the
insight in topics. This implies that flight simulators (hard- traffic system is highly dependent on the way ATC guides
ware) and simulation models (software) used for research aircraft to its destinations. Present day ATC is organized
will often be a compromise between realism and flexibility with a fixed airway structure that enables human traffic
(Hoekstra 1995). This is completely contrary to the phi- controllers to detect conflicts between aircraft and perform
losophy applied in training simulators for which realism is resolutions by guiding the traffic via radio communicated
the most important objective and highly dependent on pre- commands. This rigid “highway” structure poses con-

--- Page 3 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
straints on the flexibility of aircraft operations. Moreover, 2.2 Airborne Separation Assurance System
the capacity of an airspace sector is dependent upon the
workload of the human controllers on the ground that are With Airborne Separation Assurance pilots will operate the
responsible for separating and guiding all traffic. aircraft autonomously without depending on guidance of a
ground-based air traffic controller. It is foreseen that the
2.1 Free Flight with Airborne new task will imply a revolutionary change of ATC sys-
Separation Assurance tem, but more importantly, a new cockpit system will have
to be developed, tested, and certified.
It has been argued that removal of constraints could enable This Airborne Separation Assurance System (ASAS)
more efficient user-preferred routing, and that removal of will be an essential onboard system that will upgrade the
all constraints may eventually lead to the realization of a flight deck into a free flight deck. The future system will
Free Flight traffic environment (RTCA 1995). Free Flight encompass all the tools that pilots require for their new
has been proposed as a new concept for a future ATC sys- procedures in autonomous airspace, such as traffic moni-
tem that could relieve the growing congestion of the cur- toring, conflict detection, conflict resolution, and conflict
rent system and, moreover, would have the potential to of- prevention.
fer great economic benefits (Valenti Clari et. al., 2001). When subdividing ASAS, one can identify at least the
Figure 1 below illustrates the traffic environment of an air- following subsystems (ICAO, 2000):
space with ATC routes and an airspace in which traffic is
free to select their routes. 1. Airborne Surveillance and Separation Assurance
Processing (ASSAP) system
2. Cockpit Display of Traffic Information (CDTI)
a) ATC routes b) Preferred routes system
3. Alerting system
The CDTI and the Alerting system form the Human Ma-
chine Interface of ASAS to the pilots. Examples of CDTI
will be presented at the end of the next section. The re-
mainder of this section will discuss in more detail some
modules in the ASSAP that contains the logic for conflict
detection, resolution and prevention.
2.2.1 Conflict Detection Module
Figure 1: ATC Traffic Compared to Free Flight traffic
A conflict is defined as an actual or potential intrusion of a
It is clear from the picture that user-preferred routing protected zone in the near future. The protected zone is a
will result in a chaotic traffic environment, especially when circular zone of 5 nautical mile radius and a height of 2000
observed by a single traffic controller. This controller will ft at the altitude from 1000 ft below to 1000 ft above an
probably have problems with guiding the traffic, because aircraft; as shown in Figure 2.
the traffic pattern is unpredictable from a ground perspec-
tive. However, this is not true when observing the traffic
situation from an aircraft perspective. This is why the most
ultimate form of Free Flight assumes that the removal of
current ATC constraints will also imply a complete shift of
the separation assurance responsibility from the ground to
the cockpit, resulting in a decentralized traffic control envi-
ronment. In such a system, pilots will not only be allowed Figure 2: Protected Zone
to freely select and fly their routes, but will also have an
additional task and responsibility related to separation as- As part of the aircraft’s ASSAP system, the conflict
surance; this is often referred to as Free Flight with Air- detection module detects only conflicts with aircraft for
borne Separation Assurance. The shift of responsibility which an intrusion of the protected zone takes place within
implies a change in tasks of pilots, and also a change of the a predetermined look-ahead time. This potential intrusion,
onboard systems requirements. International research is or conflict, can be detected based on two basic aircraft tra-
still ongoing with the purpose of defining in detail the con- jectory prediction methods, which are:
cept, procedures and system requirements.
1. State-based conflict detection, and,
2. Intent-based conflict detection

--- Page 4 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
For the state-based method, the conflict detection module
uses the aircraft current position and a trend vector (ground
speed, track and vertical speed) to detect conflicts. This
method has often been used in experiments with a look-
ahead time of about five minutes.
The intent-based method uses the aircraft active flight
plan as a basis for trajectory prediction and conflict detec-
tion. This method is better applied to the more strategic
domain for operating aircraft, beyond five minutes look-
ahead time. A detailed discussion of both methods is be-
yond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, the differentia-
Figure 3: Modified Voltage Potential Method
tion of the two methods is important, because they pose
different requirements on the aircraft onboard systems. The avoidance vector is calculated as the vector start-
Moreover, research on how both methods can be applied
ing at the future position of the ownship and ending at the
best for various circumstances, is still ongoing (INTENT
edge of the intruder’s protected zone, in the direction of the
Consortium, 2001).
minimum distance vector. The length of the avoidance vec-
A new conflict is detected when an intrusion of the
tor is the amount of intrusion of the ownship in the in-
protected zone is predicted, and the time of this intrusion is
truder’s protected zone and reflects the severity of the con-
within the look-ahead time. The conflict information from
flict. It is also the shortest path out of the protected zone.
the detection module can be presented graphically to the
The ownship should try to accomplish this displace-
flight crew by using the CDTI. The next step is presenting
ment in the time remaining until the conflict start time.
the crew with options to resolve the detected conflict
Dividing the avoidance vector by the time-to-conflict
yields a speed vector that should be summed to the current
2.2.2 Conflict Resolution Module speed vector. The result is an advised track and ground
speed. Using the three-dimensional vector, an advised ver-
The conflict resolution module is a sub system of the tical speed is also calculated.
ASSAP that is responsible for calculating resolutions for The state-based resolution determines maneuver advi-
all detected conflicts. Over the years various methods for sories that resolve the detected conflict without considering
resolving conflict situations have been proposed. Some the long-term goals of the aircraft of following a route
methods use force field techniques, others use genetic al- from origin to destination. In some cases, such as with alti-
gorithms, rule-based methods, or optimization techniques; tude changes, this is not necessary. However, with horizon-
an overview of numerous approaches to conflict detection tal resolution of a conflict the crew must plan a recovery
and resolution is given in (Kuchar and Yang 1997). A sub- maneuver that will take the aircraft back on track to the
division of methods could also be made by taking into ac- destination. One way of dealing with this weak point of a
count the conflict detection method. For example, a state- state-based resolution is adding an extra functionality that
based conflict could be resolved by means of changing the enables pilots to anticipate and monitor potential conflicts.
aircraft state until the conflict disappears. An intent-based This conflict prevention functionality will be discussed in
conflict could be resolved by changing the aircraft’s active section 2.3.3.
flight plan. This implies that calculated resolution adviso-
ries must match the character of the detected conflict. 2.2.2.2 Intent-Based Conflict Resolution
2.2.2.1 State-Based Conflict Resolution Another way to tackle the problem of the recovery maneu-
ver, is to take the aircraft flight plan into account when cal-
For state-based conflicts NLR has developed the Modified culating conflict resolution advisories. Hence, the conflict
Voltage Potential concept (Hoekstra 2001), a method based resolution should be calculated and presented as an
on force field algorithms (Eby 1994) which use the values amendment to the active route. This flight plan-based reso-
shown in Figure 3. lution is best applied to the intent-based conflicts that are
When the conflict detection module predicts a conflict also detected using the aircraft routes.
with other traffic, the resolution module determines the Figure 4 shows a conflict situation between two air-
predicted future positions of the current aircraft (ownship) craft in which the ownship has detected a conflict using the
and the obstacle aircraft (intruder) at the moment of mini- intent-based conflict detection method. It is clear from the
mum distance. The minimum distance vector is the vector conflict position (i.e., the highlighted loss of separation)
from the predicted position of the intruder to the predicted that the method has taken into account the intent (flight
position of the ownship at the closest point of approach. plans) of both aircraft, which has been shared via a data
link system. Based on the conflict geometry and the air-

--- Page 5 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
discuss the Research Flight Simulator (RFS), and will focus
on developments that enable autonomous aircraft research.
3.1 Overview
The RFS, shown in Figure 5, is a four degree-of-freedom
motion-base simulator that is mainly used for civil aircraft
simulation studies. The RFS cockpit consists of generic
hardware for simulation of several civil aircraft types. The
cockpit is equipped with four large Liquid Crystal Displays
(LCDs) and four Cathode Ray Tube displays (CRTs) for
avionics displays, control-loaded flight controls, throttle
levers and several essential cockpit panels. The RFS has a
Figure 4: Flight Plan-based Conflict Resolutions
two channel collimated visual system that can be used with
an image generator. The generic hardware can be operated
craft flight plans, the resolution module can now determine
with various aircraft simulation models.
a route change that will resolve the conflict. The figure il-
lustrates how the addition of a resolution waypoint will re-
solve the conflict in the horizontal plane. This horizontal
resolution has automatically a recovery maneuver, repre-
sented by the leg after passing the resolution waypoint.
Another option of resolving this conflict would have been
a cruise altitude change to the flight plan of the ownship,
taking it over/under the intruder trajectory.
The advantage of a flight-plan based conflict resolu-
tion, besides the incorporation of a recovery maneuver, is
that route optimization techniques can be taken into ac-
count for time-efficient resolution maneuvers. Moreover, it
is expected that the method is best applied in the strategic
Figure 5: NLR Research Flight Simulator
operational domain of the aircraft, whereas, state-based
resolution is more a tactical resolution method for near-
3.2 Architecture
term conflicts. The solution can probably be found in a
combination of both. Current research projects are address-
As discussed in the introduction, flexibility implies a com-
ing this issue (INTENT consortium, 2001).
promise regarding the realism of the simulated aircraft.
Nevertheless, this compromise should not have significant
2.2.3 Conflict Prevention Module
impact on the research results. The philosophy applied is
called the “Smart Software - Simple hardware” concept
The purpose of conflict prevention is to provide pilots with
(Hoekstra 1995), and can best be explained using the RFS
additional situation awareness with respect to potential
architecture as a high level overview; see Figure 6.
conflicts. This is done by determining if maneuvers are
The figure illustrates that the simulator consists of
conflict free. Conflict prevention indication can be shown
several networked systems, that are connected to a central
on the cockpit displays, and can be applied to both aircraft
host computer. This host computer, a Silicon Graphics
state changes as to flight plan changes.
Challenge L computer, is used for real-time execution of
Simulator trials have proven that the additional aware-
all real-time simulation tasks, such as the basic aircraft and
ness is of vital importance for recovery maneuvers after
environment simulation. Moreover, the host computer pro-
resolving conflicts (“is it safe to turn back now?”), but also
vides the user-interface for managing scenarios, events and
for standard maneuvering (“what if…?”). Examples of the
data recording. The simulator hardware can be subdivided
presentation of conflict prevention functionality will be
in three groups:
give in the next section, when discussing cockpit displays.
1. Dedicated simulator hardware
3 RESEARCH FLIGHT SIMULATION OF
2. Generic simulator hardware
AUTONOMOUS AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
3. Generic cockpit hardware
The NLR has various flight simulation facilities that cover
The dedicated simulator hardware is rigid hardware with a
the fidelity range from desktop simulation applications to
specific dedicated task; such as the 4-degree of freedom
high-fidelity motion base simulators. This paper will only

--- Page 6 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
cockpit hardware contains relevant embedded logic (as in
the real aircraft), because all interpretation of functionality is
done in software applications. This allows maximum flexi-
bility regarding functionality of the simulated aircraft, which
is essential for research flight simulation.
3.3 Traffic and Experiment Manager
Traffic environment simulation is one of the key compo-
nents for autonomous aircraft research. In a typical ex-
perimental scenario the autonomous aircraft (RFS) will fly
through a Free Flight airspace with the additional responsi-
bility of self separation with the surrounding traffic. The
subject pilots will monitor the traffic environment by
means of the CDTI and sometimes in the Out-of-the-
Window View, generated by the visual system.
In the RFS architecture the traffic simulation is per-
formed by the TMX. This desktop simulation application
runs on a Windows workstation and is interfaced to all
other applications via the Ethernet network. The TMX has
a dual purpose. First of all, the TMX is the central traffic
environment simulation application. With the TMX it is
possible to generate a traffic environment with various air-
craft types, which can be both automatic pilot models and
interactively controlled by user input and scenario scripts.
The TMX also provides a graphical user interface, shown
Figure 6: RFS Architecture
in Figure 7, for the experiment manager to monitor the
overall scenario and to trigger pre-defined events for the
motion system or the visual system. A particularly impor-
RFS simulated aircraft (e.g., engine failures).
tant dedicated hardware system is the cockpit interface
node that interfaces the cockpit panels and switches to the
host computer aircraft simulation and other networked sys-
tems. All of the dedicated hardware systems are connected
to the host computer in a Scramnet reflective memory net-
work, essential for the real-time exchange of data.
The second network is an Ethernet network, which is
also directly connected to the host computer. All the work-
stations on this network have generic tasks. They form the
“playing field” when it comes to prototyping new cockpit
systems. The most important components, when focussing
on autonomous aircraft simulation, are:
1. Traffic and Experiment Manager (TMX)
2. Research Flight Management System (RFMS) and Figure 7: TMX Graphical User Interface
Airborne Separation Assurance System (ASAS)
module 3.3.1 Autonomous Traffic Simulation
3. Cockpit Displays
4. Alerting Sounds For the simulation of the autonomous traffic the TMX uses
six-degrees-of-freedom models containing auto-pilot and
All of these components are simulation applications that auto-throttle functionality, route guidance functionality and
are used for the replication of future aircraft system and a pilot model. The Eurocontrol Base-of-Aircraft Data is
environment behavior. The mentioned components will be used as data base for the simulation of different aircraft
discussed in more detail in the next sections. types (Bos 1997). Besides the basic aircraft simulation
Finally, the generic cockpit is the platform of all simple model, traffic can be simulated as conventional ATC traf-
hardware devices that enable the pilots to interact with smart fic or autonomous Free Flight traffic.
software simulated aircraft systems. None of the generic

--- Page 7 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
Conventional traffic flies along predefined routes and monitor the functionality of the FMC. Via the CDU, the
comparable to the present-day situation. Autonomous air- crew can manage the flight on a strategic level.
craft flies direct user-preferred routes from origin to desti- This central role of the FMS in the modern cockpit
nation. In order to separate the traffic, additional modules makes it an interesting system for research. Moreover,
can be activated that enable airborne separation assurance from an ATM perspective the FMS is interesting because it
of these aircraft. This implies that interaction between holds the aircraft intent, which could be used by ASAS.
autonomous aircraft can be simulated in a chaotic traffic
environment. Aircraft will detect and resolve conflicts de- 3.4.1 Generic Simulation Tool
pending on the implemented conflict detection and conflict
resolution algorithms in the ASAS module. It is also possi- The Research Flight Management System (RFMS) is an
ble to create a so-called mixed-equipped traffic environ- NLR-developed generic simulation of an aircraft FMS that
ment, by simulating both groups at the same time in the can be configured for various aircraft. The RFMS features
same airspace. common functionality, such as route implementation and
For more pilot-like behavior, the TMX pilot model in- editing, aircraft datalink functionality, aircraft progress
cludes a delayed reaction to conflict resolution advisories monitoring and trajectory guidance. Beside these standard
and a delayed resuming of navigation to the aircraft’s des- FMS functionalities the RFMS software has additional re-
tination, once a conflict is solved. The ASAS module is search functionality such as the ASAS module, discussed
discussed in more detail in section 3.4.2. in the next section.
The RFMS software can be used in combination with
3.3.2 Data Link Simulation hardware CDUs, of which two are fitted in the RFS cockpit.
This hardware-in-the-loop simulation is often used for ex-
The ASAS functionality of an autonomous aircraft must be periments with real pilots operating the system. It should be
based on complete and accurate data of the surrounding emphasized that once again the smart software - simple
traffic. This implies that data sharing between aircraft is of hardware concept is applicable, because none of RFMS
crucial importance in order to enable aircraft to see and logic runs within the hardware CDU. The hardware CDU is
avoid each other by using the available tools. One of the only used to simulate the actual look-and-feel for the pilots.
most promising inter-aircraft data link systems is called The RFMS software responds to pilot inputs on the CDU.
Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS-B), Changes to the CDU displays are shown as an output of the
for which standards are still under development. It is clear cockpit display simulation, discussed in the next section.
that ADS-B will be one of the key enablers for autonomous Another option is to use the RFMS in combination
aircraft operations and that the performance of the data with a software CDU, which is an interactive GUI running
link system will have an impact on the technical feasibility on a PC or UNIX workstation. Both the hardware and the
of airborne separation assurance. software CDU are shown in Figure 8.
It is not difficult to realize actual data sharing within
one application that simulates all traffic. Nevertheless, for
realistic traffic environment simulation, TMX can simulate
performance issues of future aircraft datalink systems (e.g.,
update rate, range effects, transponder and/or receiver
failures). Moreover, when simulating a traffic environment
around the RFS, the Ethernet network will form the me-
dium for datalink between RFS and the Traffic Manager
aircraft. This is comparable to future datalink systems,
such as ADS-B.
3.4 Research Flight Management System
(RFMS) and ASAS Module
In an aircraft, the Flight Management System consists of the Figure 8: Hardware and Software Control Display Unit
Flight Management Computer (FMC) and Control Display
Units (CDUs). The FMC is the central computer system 3.4.2 ASAS Module
comprising most functionality regarding navigation, com-
munication and trajectory optimization. The most important The ASAS algorithms for conflict detection, resolution and
functionality is the aircraft route guidance, when the aircraft prevention for the RFS are contained in a separate module
flies with the auto-flight system engaged to the FMS. The within the RFMS simulation application. As described in
CDU is the primary interface unit for the crew to interact section 2.2 an autonomous aircraft will have various sys-

--- Page 8 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
tems that are all part of ASAS. The conflict detection, reso- called NLR Avionics Display Development and Evaluation
lution and prevention functionality will make the RFS ca- System (NADDES).
pable of Free Flight. The ASAS algorithms will require NADDES facilitates the rapid development and
data regarding aircraft state, flight plan of both the ownship evaluation of avionics display formats throughout the
and the surrounding traffic. Hence a datalink between the complete human engineering and development stage. Dis-
ownship and the surrounding traffic is required. play formats can be created and tested using a customiza-
Figure 6 illustrates that the RFMS and ASAS simula- ble development environment on a standard desktop com-
tion is connected to the Ethernet network which can trans- puter, which is highly accessible to all human engineering
mit and receive data from other simulation applications. and software development experts. Figure 9 below is an
The RFMS will send data to the aircraft simulation on the example of Boeing 747-400 Primary Flight Display (PFD)
host computer for guidance of auto flight system. In return that has been made using NADDES.
the host computer will relay back aircraft sensor data (e.g.,
aircraft position and speeds) and status information of
other aircraft systems.
The ASAS module will receive from TMX state and
intent information from the surrounding traffic. This is
analogous to ADS-B data link. In return the ASAS module
and RFMS will broadcast aircraft state and intent to the
surrounding traffic simulated by TMX. Another important
flow of information is from the RFMS and ASAS module
to the cockpit displays and alerting sound system. The re-
quired data regarding the aircraft route and ASAS system
functionality are broadcast on the Ethernet so that these
applications can use it.
3.5 Cockpit Displays
The development of affordable high fidelity display sys-
tems over the last decade have resulted in the advance of Figure 9: Boeing 747-400 Primary Flight
the glass-cockpit concept. This advance is a blessing for Display
the flight simulation research community, because in mod-
ern aircraft the analog avionics have been almost com- 3.5.2 Cockpit Display of Traffic Information
pletely been replaced by digital multifunction displays.
This implies that the modern glass cockpit is becoming In an autonomous aircraft environment the pilot will re-
closer to that of a research flight simulator using the same quire information on the position of the surrounding traffic,
display techniques. and the functionality of the ASAS tools. The detection and
A difference between research and actual cockpits will resolution of conflicts with intruder aircraft must be pre-
remain, but will be well hidden from the pilots’ eye. In a sented clearly, and the conflict prevention provides addi-
real aircraft, each instrument is driven by one or more avi- tional awareness for potential conflicts. It is very likely that
onics systems. In the RFS, pilots will operate the aircraft in the future cockpit all ASAS functionality will be inte-
using the glass-cockpit avionics that have exactly the same grated in the current Navigation Display (ND), making it a
look. The presented displays are generated by dedicated CDTI. Figure 10 below gives an example how this integra-
desktop simulation applications, which replicate all real tion can be realized with a Boeing 747-400 ND.
aircraft instruments plus additional functionality. The crew The Navigation Display is split into a horizontal dis-
will not perceive the difference between the real aircraft play, which shows the ownship aircraft position as a trian-
hardware devices or the simulated functionality presented gle comparable as in the real display. Below the horizontal
on commercial-of-the-shelf LCDs and CRTs. display an additional vertical display has been added. This
vertical display gives a side view of the airspace in the
horizontal display.
3.5.1 Display Development
The presented situation shows a conflict detected with
an intruder inbound from the left on the same altitude. The
The smart software - simple hardware concept allows
state-based detection module has determined the closest
maximum flexibility, without the crew noticing the differ-
point of approach of the intruder, which is shown as a
ence with the real aircraft. To allow a flexible prototyping
dashed red circle and rectangle around the intruder’s pro-
of the used displays, NLR has developed a desktop tool
tected zone; the protected zone of the ownship is a solid

--- Page 9 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
Figure 10: CDTI Integrated in a Boeing 747-400 ND
yellow circle and rectangle. The conflict resolution module Figure 11: “Green” Intent-based Conflict
has determined a state-based resolution presented as a
heading change advisory and a vertical path advisory, this paper was to give an overview of the architecture and
which are both marked as green dashed lines in the hori- functionality of important components. Examples have
zontal and vertical displays, respectively. been given how the smart software – simple hardware con-
Finally, the conflict prevention module provides the pi- cept has been successfully applied.
lots with no-go bands on the horizontal heading scale and It can be concluded that NLR operates a powerful re-
vertical speed scale. The no-go bands indicate which ma- search flight simulation facility which has shown to be ca-
neuver will result in a conflict. The bands are also integrated pable of testing all future autonomous aircraft operational
in the PFD. Figure 9 shows a different scenario than Figure concepts as demonstrated in various past and ongoing in-
10, with a small amber band on the vertical speed scale. This ternational projects in which NLR participates.
band indicates that an conflict will occur if the aircraft The scalability of the research facility from desktop
climbs with that particular vertical speed. The color-coding flight simulation, full flight simulation, and even flight
of display of the additional functionality is chosen such that testing with the exact same hardware and software compo-
urgent conflicts (0 – 3 minutes) are marked red, medium ur- nents and architecture, is a promising set-up for efficient
gent conflict (3 – 5 minutes) are marked amber and low ur- and effective research into autonomous aircraft operations.
gent conflicts (beyond 5 minutes) are marked green. The
green conflicts can only occur with look-ahead times beyond AKNOWLEDGMENTS
5 minutes. An example of a “green” intent-based conflict is
shown in Figure 11. This picture also shows that the intent- The presented set-up and the insight into the subject of
based conflict detection has taken into account the intent (ac- Airborne Separation Assurance is a result of years of re-
tive flight plan implemented into the FMS) of both the own- search, prototyping and development in various interna-
ship and the intruder. tional research projects. Mentioning all people involved
would be too much. Nevertheless, the authors would like to
4 CONCLUSION acknowledge Dr. Jacco Hoekstra, (NLR/NASA Free Flight
project leader) and Frank Bussink (NASA, former NLR),
This concludes the overview of the simulation set-up used who have both had a major influence on the presented set-
for autonomous aircraft operations research. The aim of up and have always been advocates of the smart software –
simple hardware concept.

--- Page 10 ---

Valenti Clari, Ruigrok, Heesbeen, and Groeneweg
REFERENCES ROB RUIGROK is a research engineer at the flight me-
chanics department of NLR. He graduated in 1992 at Delft
Bos, A. 1997. User Manual for the Base of Aircraft Data University of Technology on the design and analysis of
(BADA) Revision 2.6. Eurocontrol Experimental Cen- automatic landing systems. After graduation he joined the
tre Note 23/97, Bretigny, France. flight simulation department of NLR in which he partici-
Eby, M.S. 1994. A Self-Organizational Approach for Re- pated in various simulation projects, studying Controller-
solving Air Traffic Conflicts. The Lincoln Laboratory Pilot Datalink Communication (CPDLC), future Flight
Journal Volume 7 (2), Lexington, USA. Management System (FMS) concepts, windshear detection
Hoekstra, J.M. 1995. The ‘Smart Software-Simple Hard- and alerting systems and free flight with airborne separa-
ware’ Concept for Maximum Flexibility in Research tion assurance (in cooperation with NASA). In 1998 Rob
Flight Simulation. Proceedings of the Conference of Ruigrok transferred to the flight mechanics department of
European Aerospace Societies (CEAS), CEAS paper NLR in which he continued to work on the NLR/NASA
SSw02, NLR-TP-96215, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Free Flight project. His current position is project co-
Hoekstra, J.M. 2001. Designing for Safety, the Free Flight ordinator of the INTENT project and NLR project leader
Air Traffic Management Concept. NLR-TP-2001-113, of the Mediterranean Free Flight project. His email address
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Available online: is <ruigrok@nlr.nl>.
<http://www.nlr.nl/public/hosted-
sites/freeflight/downloads/fftp.pdf> BART HEESBEEN is a research engineer at the flight
[accessed August 21, 2002]. simulation department of NLR. He graduated in 1995 at
ICAO. 2000. ASAS Circular. Draft Version 1.0, July 6th, Delft University of Technology. His graduation thesis ad-
Washington, D.C., USA. dressed the development and use of an automatic source
INTENT Consortium. 2001. INTENT D1-1 Project Scope, code generator for transformation of Simulink simulation
Relevant Results from Other Projects, Activities and models. After graduation he joined the flight simulation
Initiatives, Deliverable D1-1. Available online: department of the NLR. In his function of research engi-
<http://www.nlr.nl/public/hosted- neer he is concerned with the design and development of
sites/intent/downloads/INTENT_D1- real time simulation applications as part of the Research
1_v03_04-05-2001_P.pdf> [accessed August Flight Simulator (RFS). He worked on simulations of an
21, 2002]. airborne doppler weather radar, an Airborne Separation
Kuchar, J.K. and L.C. Yang. 1997. Survey of Conflict De- Assurance System, the Research Flight Management Sys-
tection and Resolution Modeling Methods. Proceed- tem (RFMS) and different types of aircraft. His email ad-
ings of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control dress is <heesbeen@nlr.nl>.
Conference, New Orleans, USA.
RTCA. 1995. Free Flight Implementation. Final Report of JAAP GROENEWEG is a research engineer at the hu-
RTCA Task Force 3, Washington, D.C., USA man factors department of NLR. He graduated in 1990 at
Valenti Clari, M.S.V., Ruigrok, R.C.J., Hoekstra, J.M., Delft University of Technology at the Faculty of Aero-
Visser, H.G.G. 2001. Cost-benefit Study of Free Flight space Engineering research group for flight mechanics and
with Airborne Separation Assurance, Air Traffic Con- propulsion on the design and implementation of a weight
trol Quarterly, Volume 9 (4), Arlington, USA. calculation program for transport aircraft. In 1991 he
started working at the flight simulation department of NLR
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES in which he participated in various simulation projects es-
pecially designing and evaluating new display concepts in-
MARIO VALENTI CLARI is a research engineer at the volved in human factors, flight mechanics and control &
National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR) in Amsterdam, the simulation projects. Since the beginning of 2001 he joined
Netherlands. He graduated from Delft University of Tech- the human factors department. His email address is
nology (M.Sc.) in August of 1998. His graduation assign- <groenewg@nlr.nl>.
ment was a Cost-benefit Study of Free Flight with Air-
borne Separation Assurance. After his graduation, he
joined the flight simulation department of NLR and has
since been involved in several international research pro-
jects dealing with Free Flight and future Air Traffic Man-
agement systems (INTENT, Mediterranean Free Flight,
NLR/NASA Free Flight). Besides this main interest, Mario
Valenti Clari has also performed research on the topics of
Wake Vortex Encounter Simulation and Simulator Motion
Cueing. His email address is <valenti@nlr.nl>.
View publication stats