

--- Page 1 ---

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/4206219
Traffic manager: a flexible desktop simulation tool enabling future ATM
research
Conference Paper · January 2005
DOI: 10.1109/DASC.2005.1563344 · Source: IEEE Xplore
CITATIONS READS
23 441
3 authors:
Frank Bussink Jacco Hoekstra
Netherlands Aerospace Centre Delft University of Technology
30 PUBLICATIONS 537 CITATIONS 162 PUBLICATIONS 3,027 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Bart Heesbeen
Netherlands Aerospace Centre - NLR
9 PUBLICATIONS 87 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jacco Hoekstra on 09 January 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- Page 2 ---

TRAFFIC MANAGER: A FLEXIBLE DESKTOP SIMULATION TOOL
ENABLING FUTURE ATM RESEARCH
Frank Bussink B. S., National Institute of Aerospace (NIA), Hampton, Virginia
Dr. ir. Jacco Hoekstra and Ir. Bart Heesbeen, National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR),
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Abstract airspace users [1, 2]. The aviation user community
has long identified a need to significantly increase
In 1997, the National Aerospace Laboratory of
airspace capacity and to improve the flexibility of
the Netherlands (NLR) started working on an Air
aircraft operations. This need and the introduction
Traffic Management (ATM) concept called “Free
of new surveillance technology brought about a
Flight.” Under this concept, aircraft are allowed to
new operational paradigm called “Free Flight.”
choose their own path, while maintaining separation
from all other aircraft. The study originally focused As part of the research into Free Flight,
on the human factors of airborne separation in a NASA began developing a new concept of
Free Flight environment. To provide flight crews operation called Distributed Air/Ground - Traffic
with a challenging task that might provide insight Management (DAG-TM). Under DAG-TM, users
into some interesting cockpit human factors issues would share information, collaborate on decision-
of airborne separation, artificially high traffic making and distribute decision authority to the most
densities and high conflict rates were required. This appropriate decision maker, with the goal of
called for a simulation platform scalable to meet the improving system capacity as well as increasing
traffic needs and flexible enough to model the flexibility and efficiency. The National Aerospace
interaction of aircraft in this new environment. The Laboratory of the Netherlands (NLR) has
simulation tool developed was called the Traffic collaborated with NASA in research and
Manager (TMX). development to explore the feasibility of DAG-TM.
Over the past eight years, researchers at both With an initial focus on the human factors
NLR and NASA Langley Research Center (LaRC) elements of Free Flight, new tools and procedures
have continued to enhance and improve TMX. Used were developed to validate the concept and to gain
as a stand-alone traffic simulator, scenario insight into the paradigm. Traffic Manager (TMX)
generator, scenario editor and player, experiment was born out of the study’s need for a realistic
control station, data recording tool or as a rapid simulation environment, capable of simulating
prototyping environment, its modular design, traffic patterns in a Free Flight environment. An
simplicity of use and extensibility made TMX a essential element of this environment is for aircraft
valuable asset to many ATM research projects. to self-separate; for this purpose several conflict
detection and resolution algorithms were developed.
In this paper we present a short history on the
development of TMX, give a description of its The first NLR study showed not only that Free
major features, cover specific research capabilities Flight is a promising concept for airspace with a
such as the Airborne Separation Assistance System, relatively low density, but also that it is capable of
and give some examples of applications of TMX in handling much higher traffic densities than today’s
research projects. centrally organized Air Traffic Management (ATM)
system [3]. As a result of this study, Free Flight has
become more acceptable to the aeronautical
Introduction
research community.
Although the flying public is impacted by
delays at the airports, many times the cause is in the
Development History
en-route areas as airways become congested. This
en-route capacity problem triggers more delays and Development of TMX started in 1996, initially
results in time and fuel losses for the majority of the as an off-line desktop simulation application for an
0-7803-9307-4/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE.
3.B.4-1

--- Page 3 ---

interaction study of multiple aircraft in a Free Flight modular structure in which existing modules can
environment. The focus of this study was to grow and mature.
develop and compare different algorithms for
conflict resolution. From earlier experiments, a
Description of TMX
rudimentary real-time, six degrees-of-freedom
traffic simulator was available. With an initial
capability of simulating 10 aircraft, this simulator User Interface
was extended with a graphical user interface and Used as a stand-alone air traffic simulator,
enhanced with the EUROCONTROL Base of TMX can operate in real-time or fast-time mode,
Aircraft DAta (BADA) performance models. For accepting user input both from predefined scenario
the initial study aircraft navigation guidance was files (which contain time-stamped commands to
implemented as direct routing from origin to create, control, and delete aircraft throughout a
destination airport with great circle trajectories. scenario) and from a graphical user interface [4].
Conflict detection was based on extrapolation of The user interface contains a radar-like traffic
aircraft state vectors to a maximum look-ahead window with zoom/pan functionality, a button
time. For conflict resolution, a number of methods menu bar, a command/message window, an altitude
were used, ranging from extended Visual Flight bar and a flight strip window, as shown in Figure 1.
Rules (VFR) right-of-way rules to variants of the
Modified Voltage Potential (MVP) algorithm [3].
After this desktop investigation, there was a
desire to test the developed conceptual conflict
detection and resolution (CD&R) algorithms in a
human-in-the-loop experiment using NLR’s motion
base real-time simulator, the Research Flight
Simulator (RFS). In order to use TMX in a
networked traffic simulation, a connection with the
RFS and its subsystems was created using UDP/IP
over Ethernet. Position and state information for the
simulated TMX traffic was broadcasted over
Ethernet to simulate Automatic Dependent
Surveillance - Broadcast (ADS-B). This data was
used to generate traffic information on the cockpit
displays and was used by the CD&R algorithms to
send data to the RFS warning systems. Figure 1. TMX User Interface
In the following years, TMX was ported from The radar window (main window) displays
a UNIX-based platform to the Windows simulated traffic in map perspective with coastlines
environment and was used in more sophisticated for geographical orientation and user-defined sector
experiments. With every new experiment, the and airspace boundaries. Wind vector fields may
capabilities of TMX were expanded to suit the need also be displayed. The main radar window can be
for more functionality. With every functionality replaced by an alternative screen showing a simple
enhancement, emphasis was put on the main TMX aircraft navigation display for both the horizontal
development philosophy. This philosophy dictates and vertical situation. In addition, tape gauges for
that every step in the development of TMX is the aircraft actual and selected speeds and vertical
primarily driven by the short-term goals of the next speed are available. This view can be selected for
research experiment, but with an eye on future any aircraft within the traffic simulation.
opportunities and developments that can already be
The button bar (below main window) allows
foreseen. This rapid prototype philosophy suited
the user to bypass command line inputs by using a
many research projects that depended on on-time
pointing device. The button bar consists of two
availability of new functionality and resulted in a
rows of buttons. The top row selects a subset of
3.B.4-2

--- Page 4 ---

buttons on the second row. Both the function of commanding an aircraft to change heading, speed or
each button and the menu structure of the buttons altitude, or when a user wants to select a new
are completely user-configurable by means of a altitude at which to display the wind field of a 3D
data file. The buttons can be used to store often- wind-grid.
used commands as well as complete macros.
The command/message window (lower left- Architecture
hand corner) allows the user to enter keyboard
Aside from the primary traffic state update
commands at a command line prompt. This console
loop, TMX employs an event-driven architecture
can also be used for the prompting of relevant
with a command stack populated from scenario
messages, such as events, errors or warnings.
files, from user interface input, and from externally
The flight strip window (lower right-hand connected flight simulators, as shown in Figure 2.
corner) displays flight data of one or more selected Each command is put on the Command Stack at the
aircraft. By default, the strips display call-sign, simulation time stated in its timestamp. The
origin, destination, altitude, heading, speed, and rate Command Stack works as a First In First Out
of climb. However, the contents of the strips can be (FIFO) buffer. The first command in the stack is
changed to include project-specific information. passed to the Process Command module. Process
Command interprets the command and executes all
The altitude bar (right of main window)
necessary actions and sets appropriate parameters.
primarily displays the altitude of the traffic on the
If scenario recording is activated all executed
radar window. However, when creating a new
commands will be time stamped and written to a
aircraft, this bar can also be used to quickly select
selected scenario file. Recorded scenarios can be
the desired aircraft type, altitude, and speed by
used for playback and as new initial conditions.
clicking on the bar instead of using the command
Also included is a data-logging module for post-
line. The bar also changes its functionality when
experiment analysis.
Figure 2. TMX Architecture
Aircraft Model simulation and prediction within the ATM domain.
BADA was developed and is being maintained by
The six degree-of-freedom TMX dynamics and
the EUROCONTROL Experimental Centre in
performance models were developed using BADA.
Brétigny, France. BADA uses a Total Energy
The main application of BADA is trajectory
3.B.4-3

--- Page 5 ---

Model, a reduced point-mass model that equates the interfaces, up to 500 external simulators can logon
rate of work done by forces acting on the aircraft to to the TMX environment. Any of these simulators
the rates of increase of potential and kinetic energy. can either take-over an existing TMX aircraft or be
To do so, BADA uses an Operations Performance created as a new entity into the simulation. Taking
Model, which defines the mass, flight envelope, over existing aircraft provides the flexibility to
aerodynamics, engine thrust, and fuel consumption design and test scenarios off-line, without the use of
for a given aircraft type. The BADA Airline external simulators.
Procedure Model defines the speeds that are to be
used during the climb, cruise and descent flight
Research Capabilities of TMX
phases [5].
Initially designed to study various aspects of
TMX aircraft models are integrated with auto-
Free Flight, TMX has evolved into one of NLR’s
flight functionality, 4D Flight Management System
key research tools for a variety of ATM research
(FMS) guidance, and a pilot model. The pilot model
projects. Through the collaboration between NLR
includes parameters for reaction time and
and NASA, TMX now also forms an important part
scheduling effects.
of the ATM research environment at NASA
Due to a constant emphasis on computational Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton,
efficiency, TMX can simulate up to 1000 aircraft Virginia. Both NLR and NASA LaRC have
simultaneously. These aircraft can operate from continued to work on improving and enhancing
gate to gate, with simulations for pushback, taxiing, TMX, resulting in TMX being used in a variety of
take-off, en-route, approach and landing. international research projects.
Major capabilities that have been developed
External Interfaces for these projects include:
The wide range of interfaces supported by
• ADS-B Model
TMX makes it a very versatile traffic simulation
• TIS-B Model
tool. Given that TMX can be hooked up to almost
• ASAS
any simulation and even to flight hardware of a
• Wind & Weather
research aircraft, its application to ATM research is
• Airborne Precision Approach Spacing
nearly limitless.
For connection with the motion simulator at
NLR, special Ethernet Management and
ADS-B Model
Programming Utilities have been developed to cope
with the need for flexibility and fast debugging of ADS-B is considered to be one of the enabling
Ethernet communication. These routines and technologies for Free Flight and other future ATM
utilities provide more efficiency and transparency concepts. For that reason, a generic ADS-B model
when working with Ethernet communication. The has been designed and implemented in TMX. The
routines and utilities are based on a method that ADS-B model is split into transmitter and receiver
uses ASCII database files to describe Ethernet components. This makes it possible to simulate the
traffic. This method has been successfully used at real process of sending out ADS-B messages and
NLR for several years and has proven to be receiving ADS-B messages from other aircraft,
valuable and powerful [6]. including the real-life limitations that affect both
transmitter and receiver hardware. The ADS-B
Another way of connecting simulators to TMX
model also models errors in position and state
is through Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS)
reporting.
or High Level Architecture (HLA). TMX can also
be connected through the Internet using DirectPlay, The transmitter component collects data from
a component of Microsoft DirectX. Through each aircraft and transmits this data at a given
DirectPlay, TMX can host a web session that allows update rate for each message. (e.g.,1 second for
desktop simulators to log on to the traffic
simulation in progress. By means of all these
3.B.4-4

--- Page 6 ---

state vector report). Messages that are currently Figure 3 shows the ADS-B message reception
implemented, include1: function for r = 90 nm and r = 100 nm.
1 2
• State vector data: contains information
1
about an aircraft or vehicle’s current
0.9
kinematic state
0.8
• Mode status data: contains current
operational information about the 0.7
transmitting participant 0.6
• Air reference velocity data: contains 0.5
velocity information that is not required 0.4
from all airborne ADS-B transmitting 0.3
participants, and that may not be
0.2
required at the same update rate as the
0.1
position and velocity element in the state
0
vector report. 80 85 90 95 100 105 110
Range (nm)
• Target state data: provides information
on the horizontal and vertical targets for
the active flight segment.
• Trajectory change data: contains long-
term intent information providing
strategic path information for path
prediction and other functions, such as
conformance monitoring. This
information can include waypoint
constraints, Trajectory Change Points
(TCPs), and their connecting flight
segments.
• TRACON data: user defined on
condition report, containing data
imperative to the Airborne Precision
Approach Spacing algorithm
The receiver component determines whether or
not an aircraft will receive a message. The
probability of reception near the ADS-B range
limits is determined by a drop-model. For this, two
range distance parameters are specified, between
which the probability of message reception varies
according to the following function:
1 Note: messages can be formatted according to the RTCA
MASP for ADS-B (DO-242A).
noitpeceR
egasseM
B-SDA
fo
ytilibaborP
Figure 3. ADS-B Message Reception Range
All messages are stored into buffers and
aircraft can only retrieve data from messages they
actually received. Between transmissions, the
received ADS-B data is extrapolated and used by
the applications within TMX.
TIS-B Model
Traffic Information Service Broadcast (TIS-B)
provides suitably equipped aircraft and ground
vehicles with surveillance information broadcasted
from a ground server. To represent some of the
functionality of TIS-B, a simplified primary
surveillance radar model has been implemented.
The radar model provides primary radar returns to
the TIS-B model, which subsequently combines this
data with available ADS-B data. The ground-based
transmitter then broadcasts the data over the same
channel as the ADS-B data, but at a reduced update
rate (12 seconds for state vector reports). Aircraft
can distinguish TIS-B data from ADS-B data by
examining the participant address identifier in the
message. The current implementation is designed
around the ADS-B model and is very rudimentary.
It serves only as a means of providing ADS-B data
for aircraft that are not ADS-B equipped. No real-
life TIS-B service volumes or characteristics have
been simulated.
3.B.4-5

--- Page 7 ---

ASAS has indicated that PASAS reduces the essentiality of
intent-based CD&R algorithms [3].
TMX was designed to simulate multiple
aircraft, each equipped with an Airborne Separation
Assistance System or ASAS. ASAS will detect a Wind and Weather
predicted loss of separation (conflict) within a
To assess the effect of wind prediction errors,
certain look-ahead time. This is often referred to as TMX employs a wind model that contains two
conflict detection.
distinct 3D wind grids. One wind grid is filled with
A conflict resolution module inside the ASAS truth wind and the other grid is filled with predicted
calculates a recommended maneuver to avoid loss wind data. The ASAS module and many other
of separation (Figure 4). A number of methods for systems use the predicted wind data, while the
conflict resolution have been implemented: altitude aircraft dynamics model uses the truth wind data, to
step, cross product of speed vectors, extended VFR simulate the effects of the wind as the aircraft
right-of-way rules and two different experiences it. The wind grids can be populated by
implementations of the Modified Voltage Potential grid data downloaded from the National Oceanic
(MVP), including one specifically designed for and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) website.
maneuvers without speed changes [3, 7]. Once inserted into the wind model, this data can be
used to visualize national and even global wind
patterns.
To depict weather cells, TMX uses 3D
polygons. These polygons move in accordance with
the wind direction and velocity. Furthermore, a
level of severity can be assigned to each of these
polygons. Within the ASAS module, the predictive
ASAS system can detect and issue warnings on
polygons by displaying bands on the horizontal and
vertical display. Future enhancements will include
the ability of the CD&R algorithms to detect and
resolve conflicts with polygons.
Airborne Precision Approach Spacing
Besides looking at ways to increase en-route
capacity, TMX has also been used to look at
Figure 4. Conflict Resolution
reducing uncertainties in the arrival process.
The ASAS module also encompasses an intent- Reducing uncertainties could effectively increase
based CD&R algorithm, which uses Trajectory airport arrival capacities even without altering in-
Change information from other traffic to detect and trail separation minima. For that purpose, an
resolve conflicts. With intent-based algorithms it is algorithm for merging multiple aircraft arrival
possible to extend the look-ahead time and detect streams and precisely spacing aircraft over the
conflicts much sooner. Taking into account the runway threshold has been developed by NASA
planned trajectory changes, they also reduce the LaRC and implemented within TMX. This airborne
number of nuisance and false alerts [8]. tool, called Airborne Merging and Spacing for
Terminal Arrivals (AMSTAR), uses charted arrival
Besides CD&R, this module also contains
routes containing lateral and vertical constraints and
conflict prevention functionality in the form of
lead final approach speed to generate speed
“Predictive ASAS” (PASAS). PASAS is used to
guidance, which when followed results in an
prevent aircraft from maneuvering into a conflict by
aircraft crossing the runway threshold at an
providing “no-go” bands on the vertical speed tape,
assigned spacing interval.
the heading/track tape and the speed tape. Research
3.B.4-6

--- Page 8 ---

To set up the arrival stream, an airport enhanced to incorporate the AMSTAR guidance
scheduler/sequencer has been developed within algorithm, improve waypoint constraint adherence,
TMX to issue Required Times of Arrival (RTAs) at refine aircraft models, augment the ADS-B range
TRACON entry points (the “metering fixes”). The model, and increase the scope of data recording
sequencer/scheduler uses ADS-B data, together [10]. Initial analysis of the data focused primarily
with a database of arrival routes, a prediction of on the precision with which the assigned spacing
winds along the arrival routes, and a matrix of was achieved at the runway threshold (Figure 5).
required separations according to aircraft wake
turbulence class, to issue RTAs and assign aircraft
sequences. While an operationally deployed
sequencer/scheduler—as part of a ground-based
decision support tool suite—would likely determine
arrival routes and landing runways based upon
optimal runway balancing criteria, the TMX
sequencer/scheduler uses arrival routes and runways
that are assigned a priority through the TMX
scenario files.
Applications of TMX
Many revolutionary ATM concepts need to be
studied in depth before any recommendation about
practical implementation can be made. That calls
for a comprehensive simulation of all aspects of a
Figure 5. Spacing Errors in a Nominal Scenario
concept. Through fast-time, Monte Carlo studies,
insight can be provided into potential benefits, The airspace modeled for the study was the
safety implications, and the stability of a complex Dallas Fort-Worth TRACON, with three
system. However, it is also necessary to have standardized arrival routes. All aircraft in the arrival
human players interact with a novel concept in an flow were assumed to be AMSTAR-capable. RTA
operationally viable environment [9]. The success errors at the TRACON entry point for each aircraft
of TMX is a result of its wide range of applicability, were randomly selected from a normal distribution,
from fast-time, Monte Carlo batch simulation to and each test condition was repeated 40 times. The
full-featured flight-test environments. Some of the results of the study indicated that the AMSTAR
major applications are: concept and prototype onboard systems performed
satisfactorily under the nominal test condition,
• Off-line (fast-time) Traffic Simulation
which included errors averaging up to 20 degrees in
• On-line (real-time) Traffic Simulation
predicted wind direction, as well as bounded
• Internet Traffic Simulation
random errors in the time when aircraft entered the
• In-flight Traffic Simulation TRACON [11].
• Experiment Control Station
On-Line Traffic Simulation
The subsequent sections describe examples of
In June of 2004, NASA Ames and Langley
research projects that used the variety of TMX
Research Centers jointly conducted a human-in-the-
applications.
loop experiment, to address concept feasibility
issues pertaining to integrated air/ground operations
Off-Line Traffic Simulation of DAG-TM (Figure 6). Under the En Route Free
Maneuvering component of DAG-TM, flight crews
In 2004, NASA LaRC commenced a fast-time
of appropriately equipped “autonomous” aircraft fly
study to evaluate the performance of AMSTAR.
under Autonomous Flight Rules. These aircraft
This study made use of the batch capability of
were able to choose their own route and altitude,
TMX. Preparatory to this study, TMX was
3.B.4-7

--- Page 9 ---

subject to maintaining separation from all other aircraft control. This large-scale, high-fidelity
aircraft. Controllers continued to provide separation experiment with pilots and controllers has indicated
between “managed” aircraft unequipped for that many autonomous aircraft can be added to a
autonomous flight and traffic flow management moderately high number of managed aircraft in the
services for all aircraft. During the experiment, same airspace without increasing controller
TMX provided background aircraft equipped with workload, while maintaining flight crew workload
ASAS that were capable of flying under the at acceptable levels. The experiment has also
Autonomous Flight Rules. In addition, the map demonstrated that a well-integrated and compatible
perspective of the TMX radar screen gave set of advanced air/ground automation and well-
researchers an overview of the situation. Secondary defined procedures will be required to enable the
or “slave” TMX stations were used for pseudo capacity gains without compromising safety [12].
Figure 6. Joint NASA Ames / Langley DAG-TM Experiment
Internet Traffic Simulation In-Flight Traffic Simulation
As part of the Free Flight feasibility study, The Self-Separation and Sequencing (SSS)
NLR performed two Internet experiments that Flight Experiment was conducted by NASA LaRC
involved many real pilots in order to study human as part of the Small Aircraft Transportation System
interaction effects on the Free Flight operation. For (SATS) project. The goal of this experiment was to
this experiment, TMX was extended with Internet determine if instrument-rated general aviation (GA)
game host functionality, creating a distributed pilots could self-separate and sequence their
simulation network. Pilots were provided with a aircraft, while following a simulated aircraft, into a
PC-based flight simulator featuring an Electronic simulated non-towered, non-radar airport during
Flight Instrument System (EFIS), an autopilot, and simulated Instrument Meteorological Conditions.
ASAS, but without an FMS (though there was a TMX served as the main basis of the airborne
simulated FMS path on the navigation display). research software. For this purpose TMX was
Through this flight simulator, pilots from all over installed onboard a Cirrus SR22X research aircraft,
the world were able to log onto TMX and as shown in Figure 7.
participate in a running traffic scenario. The results
indicated that human pilots behaved very similar to
the pilot models. In addition, it also showed that
humans were better at avoiding peak conflict rates
in complex conflict geometries, because they were
able to anticipate potential problem areas [13].
3.B.4-8

--- Page 10 ---

starting, stopping, pausing and recommencing a
scenario, as well as time-control messages. An
experiment leader can also use TMX to oversee the
scenario, introduce special events such as system
failures, and log events when they occur. The
opposite applies as well, where commands can be
sent to TMX from any remote simulation to control
TMX. This feature was extensively used during the
NASA Ames / Langley DAG-TM experiment. In
this experiment, secondary or “slave” TMX stations
at NASA LaRC were linked to a primary or
“master” TMX station and used as pseudo aircraft
stations. These slave TMX stations included the full
TMX feature set, with the ability to oversee the
scenario and control the aircraft when necessary.
Each station was assigned to an air traffic control
sector and, through the use of “Voice over IP”,
pseudo pilots were in direct contact with the ATC
controllers at NASA Ames. Commands entered on
a slave station were sent to the master station for
validation and processing. Commands were only
implemented by the master station, which would
subsequently send out the changes, so that the
Figure 7. TMX Onboard Cirrus SR22X changes would be reflected on all other slave
stations. Through this capability it was possible to
The TMX software provided traffic generation,
control multiple streams of aircraft with relative few
conflict detection and prevention, visual and audio
human operators.
alerts and was used as a decision support tool in
support of self-separation operations. Additional
software was developed for the interface between Conclusion
TMX and the onboard systems. Quantitative
Research into future ATM concepts and
analyses of the data acquired during the SSS Flight
applications calls for a simulation tool that is
Experiment suggested that a GA pilot’s ability to
flexible and capable enough to meet any research
fly an instrument approach was not adversely
simulation requirement. TMX is such a tool.
affected by the additional tasks of self-separating
Through its wide range of capabilities, as a fast-
and sequencing. Furthermore, analyses of
time batch study simulator or as an in-flight traffic
qualitative data collected during the SSS Flight
simulator, TMX has proven to be a valuable asset to
Experiment indicated that the level of workload
many types of ATM research. With its capability of
experienced by a pilot, while flying an instrument
simulating up to 1000 aircraft simultaneously, each
approach and performing self-separation and
equipped with ADS-B, ASAS and FMS, its
sequencing tasks, was no greater than that
capability to connect to external simulators through
experienced when performing baseline (i.e., current
a multitude of interfaces, its architecture or its
day) approaches [14].
design philosophy, which makes it possible to have
new research capability available in short time,
Experiment Control Station TMX has proven itself to be an extremely useful
tool. With its roots in Free Flight, TMX will
In many experiments, TMX has served as the
continue to help modernize and improve the way
primary experiment control station. Through TMX,
we use our airspace system today.
control messages can be sent to any participant in
the simulation or to any federate in a federation of
simulations. These messages include commands for
3.B.4-9

--- Page 11 ---

References Management Simulation: Results, Progress And
Plans”, AIAA MST, Austin TX
[1] Federal Aviation Administration, Operational
Evaluation Plan, http://www.faa.gov/programs/oep/ [10] Bussink, F.J.L., N.A. Doble, B.E. Barmore, S.
Singer, 2004, “A Fast Time Simulation
[2] Delays to Air Transport in Europe, Annual
Environment For Airborne Merging And Spacing
Report 1999
Research”, 23rd Digital Avionics Systems
[3] Hoekstra, J.M., 2001, “Designing For Safety: Conference, Salt Lake City, UT
The Free Flight Air Traffic Management Concept”,
[11] Krishnamurthy, K., B.E. Barmore, F.J.L.
Doctoral Thesis, Delft University of Technology,
Bussink, 2005, “Airborne Precision Spacing In
ISBN 90-806343-2-8
Merging Terminal Arrival Routes: A Fast-Time
[4] Heesbeen, W.W.M., J.M. Hoekstra, M.S.V. Simulation Study”, 6th USA/Europe Air Traffic
Valenti Clari, 2003, “Traffic Manager: Traffic Management R&D Seminar, Baltimore, MD
Simulation For Validation of Future ATM
[12] Barhydt, R., P. Kopardekar, 2005, “JOINT
Concepts”, AIAA Modeling And Simulation
Ames/Langley Experiment Evaluation Of
Technologies Conference & Exhibit, Austin, TX
Integrated Air/Ground Operations For En-Route
[5] Nuic, A., 2003, “User Manual for the Base of Free Maneuvering”, 6th USA/Europe Air Traffic
Aircraft Data (BADA) – Revision 3.5”, Eurocontrol Management R&D Seminar, Baltimore, MD
Experimental Centre, Bretigny, France
[13] Hoekstra, J.M., R. van Gent, J. Groeneweg,
http://www.eurocontrol.int/eec/public/standard_pag
2003, “Airborne Separation Assurance Validation
e/ACE_bada.html
With Multiple Humans-In-The-Loop”, 5th
[6] Groeneweg, J., 2001, “Ethernet I/F Management USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D
and Programming Utilities”, Amsterdam, NLR, Seminar, Budapest
NLR-TR-2001-271
[14] Ramiscal E., J. Murdoch, J. McNabb, F.J.L.
[7] Hoekstra, J.M., R.C.J. Ruigrok, R.N.H.W.van Bussink, 2004, “Feasibility of Self-Separation and
Gent, J. Visser, B. Gijsbers, M.S.V. Valenti Clari, Sequencing during GPS Instrument Approaches“,
W.W.M. Heesbeen, B.G. Hilburn, J. Groeneweg, 23rd Digital Avionics Systems Conference, Salt
F.J.L. Bussink, H.A.P. Blom, 2000, “Overview of Lake City, UT
NLR Free Flight Project 1997-1999”, NLR-TP-
2000-227.
Email Addresses
[8] Ruigrok, R.C.J., M.S.V. Valenti Clari, 2003,
Frank Bussink, f.j.bussink@larc.nasa.gov
“The Impact Of Aircraft Intent Information And
Traffic Separation Assurance Responsibility On En- Jacco Hoekstra, hoekstra@nlr.nl
Route Airspace Capacity”, 5th USA/Europe Air
Bart Heesbeen, heesbeen@nlr.nl
Traffic Management R&D Seminar, Budapest
[9] Prevot, T., S. Shelden, E. Palmer, W. Johnson,
V. Battiste, N. Smith, T. Callantine, P. Lee, J. 24th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
Mercer, 2003, “Distributed Air/Ground Traffic
October 30, 2005
3.B.4-10
View publication stats