

--- Page 1 ---

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268556106
Traffic Manager - Traffic Simulation for Validation of Future ATM Concepts
Conference Paper · August 2003
DOI: 10.2514/6.2003-5368
CITATIONS READS
13 297
3 authors, including:
Bart Heesbeen Jacco Hoekstra
Netherlands Aerospace Centre - NLR Delft University of Technology
9 PUBLICATIONS 87 CITATIONS 162 PUBLICATIONS 3,027 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jacco Hoekstra on 09 January 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- Page 2 ---

AIAA 2003-5368
AIAA Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference and Exhibit
11 - 14 August 2003, Austin, Texas
TRAFFIC MANAGER
TRAFFIC SIMULATION FOR VALIDATION OF FUTURE ATM CONCEPTS
Bart Heesbeen*, Jacco Hoekstra†, Mario Valenti Clari*
National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
P.O. Box 90502, 1006 BM, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
phone:+31 20 511 3761, fax.: +31 20 511 3210, e-mail: heesbeen@nlr.nl
successfully in many research projects often
ABSTRACT concerned with Free Flight. One of the most
important reasons for this success is the
The National Aerospace Laboratory NLR
development philosophy which made it possible to
developed the Traffic Manager (TMX), a desktop
have new research capabilities available in short
air traffic environment simulation tool suitable for
time. Its flexible set-up and the ability to link it to
a wide range of fast and real-time applications. The
external simulators make TMX an extremely useful
main reason for this development was the need for
tool for simulating a realistic traffic environment.
a research simulation tool that could be used in the
The combination of the traffic environment
exploration and validation of new Air Traffic
simulation with multiple real-time human-in-the-
Management (ATM) concepts.
loop simulators is ideal for validating new ATM
Because the current medium and long-
concepts from an airborne perspective. term forecasts predict significant increase in air
Because of the wide range of capabilities
traffic movements, there is a strong need for new
of TMX, it also is used in many experiments that
ATM concepts that can deal with this increase in
don’t involve Free Flight research. One of the
air traffic movements. For this reason both Europe
strongest points of TMX which sets it apart from
and the United States are investing in the
other traffic simulators, is the capability to simulate development and validation of future ATM
in real-time a large number of up to 1000 fully
concepts. NLR is participating in many projects
equipped aircraft (including FMS, ASAS, ADS-B) concerning these research topics.
at a time.
Concept validation research often
encompasses fast- and real-time simulation studies.
Studies that demand flexible, accurate and easy-to-
use tools. In particular realistic traffic simulation is INTRODUCTION
essential when it comes to validating new After decades of continuous growth of air traffic,
operational concepts. For this purpose the TMX the research into the future of the Air Traffic
has been developed. TMX has proven to be an Management (ATM) is one of most relevant topics
ideal tool for various validation and research in aviation industry. Although there is a temporary
purposes. It can be used as on-line traffic generator halt to traffic growth, current medium term
and experiment manager for flight simulators, but forecasts still predict significant increase in traffic
also as off-line traffic simulation tool. movements. For this reason both Europe and the
This paper discusses the development of United States are investing in the development and
this versatile traffic simulation application and the validation of future ATM concepts.
way it grew to new research challenges. Special Concept validation research often
attention is paid to the various developed interfaces encompasses fast- and real-time simulation studies.
for linking TMX to real-time flight simulators, Studies that demand flexible, accurate and easy-to-
such as NLR’s Research Flight Simulator (RFS) or use tools. In particular realistic traffic simulation is
remote simulators via Distributed Interactive essential when it comes to validating new
Simulation (DIS), High Level Architecture (HLA) operational concepts. For this purpose the National
and/or internet protocols. Also an overview is Aerospace Laboratory NLR developed the Traffic
given of some recent ATM studies that made use of Manager (TMX), a desktop air traffic environment
TMX. simulation tool for a wide range of fast and real-
TMX has earned its “wings” in Free Flight time applications. TMX has proven to be an ideal
research over the past years. It has been used very tool for various validation and research purposes.
*
Research Scientist Aeronautical Engineering (MSc)
†
Head of Training Research and Concept Validation dep. and Research Scientist Aeronautical Engineering (Dr MSc)
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2003 by the National Aerospace Laboratory NLR. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
| gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
| 5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 3 ---

It can be used as on-line traffic generator and traffic simulation, a connection with the real-time
experiment manager for flight simulators, but also simulation of the RFS and its subsystems had to be
as off-line traffic simulation tool. created.
Moreover, the origin of TMX lies in the This connection was implemented using
NLR Free Flight research and therefor contains TCP/IP over ethernet. Position and state
several conflict detection and resolution algorithms information of the simulated traffic in TMX is
for simulating autonomous traffic. Some broadcasted over ethernet as to simulate Automatic
algorithms take into account the traffic intent, Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS-B)
others are based on aircraft state or predefined transmitted data from surrounding traffic. This data
rules. is used to generate traffic information on the
This paper discusses the development of cockpit displays and show traffic in the computer
this versatile traffic simulation application and the generated out-of-the-window view. The ASAS is
way it grew to new research challenges. Special simulated in TMX for all simulated traffic and also
attention is paid to the various developed interfaces for the RFS itself. This means that CD&R
for linking TMX to real-time flight simulators, information for the RFS is generated by TMX and
such as NLR’s Research Flight Simulator (RFS) or is broadcasted over ethernet to the cockpit displays
remote simulators via Distributed Interactive and warning systems.
Simulation (DIS), High Level Architecture (HLA) This was the first time TMX was used to
and/or internet protocols. Also an overview is simulate the traffic environment and ASAS for the
given of some recent ATM studies that made use of RFS. In the following years TMX was used in
TMX. numerous experiments. With every new experiment
the capabilities of TMX were expanded to suite the
needs for more functionality. This often involved
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF TMX adding new functionalities but also refinement or
enhancement of existing functionalities. Some of
Development of TMX started in 1996 initially as
the major added functionalities include:
an off-line desktop simulation application for an
interaction study of multiple aircraft in a Free
Flight environment. The focus of this study was to • Predictive ASAS, indicating the presence of
develop and compare different algorithms for potential conflicts relative to the current
conflict resolution. aircraft state vector.
To make this possible the basic • 4D Flight Management System (FMS)
components of TMX were developed. The real guidance, flight plan based trajectories.
heart of TMX is the simulation of multiple aircraft. • Automatic traffic scenario generation.
For this initial study the guidance for each aircraft • Intent based CD&R, making use of FMS and
was implemented as direct routing from origin Mode Control Panel (MCP) data.
airport to destination airport with great circle • Connections for multiple on-line simulators.
trajectories. Conflict detection is based on • Hosting of interactive distributed traffic
extrapolation of both the aircraft state vectors until simulation using the internet.
the maximum look-ahead time, for each pair of • DIS and HLA interfaces for connection with
aircraft. A number of methods for conflict other simulators.
resolution were implemented1: altitude step, cross • ADS-B characteristics simulation.
product of speed vectors, extended Visual Flight
Rules (VFR) rules and two different
implementations of the Modified Voltage Potential DEVELOPMENT PHILOSOPHY OF TMX
(MVP), one specially to manoeuvre without speed
The main philosophy behind the development of
changes. The Conflict Detection & Resolution
TMX was to fulfil the specific needs for research
(CD&R) algorithms form the key components of
tools in studies on future ATM concepts, in a rapid
the Airborne Separation Assurance System
prototyping fashion. Or to put it in other famous
(ASAS). In order to keep score and rate the
words: “I feel the need for speed”. Each step in the
different simulation runs, a number of statistical
development of TMX is primarily driven by the
calculations were implemented. The results of these
short-term goals of the next research experiment
calculations are recorded to a logging file for later
but with an eye on future opportunities and
analysis.
developments that already can be foreseen.
After this desktop investigation there was
This philosophy also determines the way
a desire to test the developed conceptual CD&R
TMX is constructed. TMX has a modular structure
algorithms in a human-in-the-loop experiment
in which existing modules can grow and mature to
using NLR’s motion base real-time simulator, the
meet new functionality needs and new modules can
RFS. For this purpose the baseline of TMX was
easily be fitted in. A module is not developed to be
enhanced to serve as traffic environment simulation
an all comprehensive version but must meet the
for the RFS. In order to use TMX as an on-line
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
|
gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
| 5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 4 ---

goals of today. In a way similar to the “just in test bench for different CD&R algorithms. Off-line
time” concept. It’s not efficient to develop simulations were used to test and compare
functionality that will be laying on the shelf and effectiveness and efficiency of these algorithms.
won’t be needed for a long time or even ever. Furthermore in 1998 a Cost-Benefit Study was
Another strong point to this approach is the fact performed aimed at investigating the conflict
that with every experiment new insights are gained resolution manoeuvres using state-based conflict
that can affect and even turn around the direction of detection and resolution algorithms2,3. Another off-
future developments. This might result in line simulation study looked at complex conflict
developments made in advance becoming obsolete, geometries to test the robustness and exception
which is a waste of invested time. handling of the different CD&R algorithms4.
Through the years many developers have Off-line simulation is also used to test
contributed to the development of TMX. A traffic scenarios and fine-tune them before they can
developer doesn’t need a complete understanding be used for on-line simulation with a simulator.
of all the TMX code. The modular structure makes Testing scenarios with off-line simulation is needed
it possible for a developer to concentrate on the to make sure that the desired traffic densities are
module he’s working on. The only knowledge he reached and no unwanted behaviour or incidents
needs to have of the other TMX modules is to occur. Fine-tuning scenarios is often needed to
which modules he must interface and what ensure that the research aircraft (simulator) will
interaction is needed. Besides this the main encounter the intended number of conflicts. It turns
architecture of TMX is compact and easy to out to be hard to generate conflicts in a Free Flight
comprehend, as will be shown in a later section airspace, especially if no flight plan routing is used.
describing the architecture.
In the past years this approach has been On-line Traffic Simulation
exercised in the development of TMX with great
Besides the off-line capabilities of TMX its big
success. Many research projects depended on the
advantage over other traffic simulation tools is its
availability of new functionality that only could be
capability to run on-line simulations as well. In an
provided in time using this approach. on-line simulation TMX is connected to one or
more flight simulators, such as RFS, making it
possible for simulators to become part of the traffic
CAPABILITIES OF TMX simulation. Connected to TMX the RFS enables
Today, after more than seven years of development concept validation of ATM concepts from an
and use in various international research projects, airborne perspective5. In the on-line set-up TMX
TMX has grown to one of NLR’s key research simulates the interactive traffic and provides the
tools for future ATM concepts. The success of traffic data to the connected flight simulator. Pilots
TMX is a result of its wide range of capabilities, flying the simulator can perceive the surrounding
which also made it very useful in simulation traffic on the cockpit displays like the Cockpit
experiments that don’t involve Free Flight. Some Display with Traffic Information (CDTI) and in the
of TMX major capabilities are: out-of-the-window view.
• Off-line (fast-time) Traffic Simulation Internet Traffic Simulation
• On-line (real-time) Traffic Simulation A special variant of on-line traffic simulation is one
• Internet Traffic Simulation with multiple flight simulators connected to TMX
• In-flight Traffic Simulation over internet using the DirectPlay® library, which is
• Experiment Control Station part of Microsoft® DirectX®. The use of this
• Scenario Generator, Editor and Player protocol enables simulation sessions with remote
• Data Recording Tool participants that log on to the TMX. In 2000 NLR
• Demonstration Tool conducted internet Free Flight experiments
involving pilots from Europe, the United States and
The above-mentioned capabilities of TMX will be even Japan6. The subject pilots were tasked to fly
discussed in more detail in the next subsections. through a predefined free flight airspace using the
NLR desktop simulator FreeSIM. Purpose of the
Off-line Traffic Simulation internet experiment was to involve as many real
pilots in order to study human interaction effects on
The off-line (i.e. stand-alone) traffic simulation
the Free Flight operation. For additional incentive,
mode of TMX allows users to prepare and analyse
money prices were awarded to the pilots who
traffic scenarios from their desktop. The simulation
operated their simulated aircraft best within the
can be run in real-time or in fast-time. As part of
safety and economic constraints.
the NLR Free Flight research several off-line
One of the most interesting observations
simulation studies have been conducted using
during this so-called web experiment, was that
TMX. As already mentioned, TMX started out as a
pilots could not distinguish between traffic
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
|
gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
| 5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 5 ---

controlled by humans and by ‘bots’ (automated some build-up time will produce a filled airspace
pilots), so the pilot models of TMX passed this with a stable traffic density. This results in very
variation of the Turing-test. This shows that the realistic traffic scenarios. It is possible to save the
off-line simulations with only bots are useful for stabilised traffic picture into a start-up traffic
validation. scenario file.
TMX can play back one scenario file and
In-flight Traffic Simulation simultaneously record to another one. In this
manner an existing scenario can be played back,
TMX can also be used for in-flight simulation to
changed by on-line inserting commands, and
perform flight trails. The state information of the
recorded to a new scenario file. In the simulation
research aircraft is retrieved from the avionics
experiments the prepared scenarios are played back
systems and interfaced to TMX. In this manner the
to reproduce the complete traffic picture.
research aircraft is connected to TMX in the same
way a flight simulator is connected for on-line
simulation. TMX can simulate traffic around the Data Recording Tool
research aircraft that can be displayed on TMX contains a number of statistical functions to
experimental cockpit displays making it possible to determine the traffic density, fuel consumption,
generate virtual conflicts and let the experimental number of conflicts and intrusions. Besides this the
pilot interact with the simulated traffic. At this position of the research simulator can be tracked
moment preparations are under way to use TMX in and in case it’s in a conflict the Closest Point of
Free Flight flight trails in both Europe and the US. Approach (CPA) en the resolution vector. All these
In Europe the Mediterranean Free Flight (MFF)7 parameters are time stamped and written to a
project will perform flight trails in the logging file. Remarks or other markers can be
Mediterranean area, which are planned to start in entered on the command line and also will added to
2004. In the US the NASA-led Small Aircraft the logging file. Research projects may have
Transportation System (SATS)8 program is special needs for recording parameters and this can
preparing flight trails to be held this year. easily be added to the existing capability.
Experiment Control Station Demonstration Tool
During on-line simulations TMX also serves as TMX can run on almost any laptop computer and
experiment control station where the complete therefore can be demonstrated almost anywhere
traffic simulation can be overseen. The experiment running in its off-line mode. It is often used to
leader can watch the scenarios develop and if show examples of scenarios that were used in on-
necessary control the complete traffic simulation line simulation experiments or show enlightening
by entering commands. A wide range of commands examples of complex conflict geometries and the
make it possible to take control over each way they are solved by the CD&R algorithms.
simulated aircraft and set all kinds of parameters.
The behaviour of almost every simulated system
can be adjusted by changing its parameter values. TMX ARCHITECTURE
Special events such as simulated system failures of
The previous section gave an overview of the
the simulator can be introduced. Data logging can
diversity and flexibility of the TMX. This section
be monitored and controlled during the experiment.
will give a look inside TMX and will show its
Remarks or other markers can be added to the
architecture. But first a look at the face of TMX, its
loggging files at any time during the simulation
Graphical User Interface (GUI).
runs.
Graphical User Interface
Scenario Generator, Editor and Player
The GUI of TMX is shown in Figure 1. The TMX
TMX can automatically generate traffic scenarios.
software runs on a conventional personal computer
To do so the user has to select a number of airports running the Windows® (95, 98, 2000) operating
and airspace entries around the experiment area and
system. The GUI consists of both an input and
define average time intervals between scheduled
output part. The output part presents all
take-offs. Each departing aircraft will randomly
information about the simulated traffic and the
receive one of the selected destinations. The
execution status of the scenario. Furthermore status
trajectory between origin and destination airport
indication is provided for connections to other
can be direct routing or following user defined
simulations. The input part accepts user inputs
flight plans between origin and destination. Aircraft
entered in a console/command window with a
that reach their destination or leave the
keyboard or selecting functions or objects with a
experimental airspace are deleted from the
cursor control device.
simulation. In this way the scenario generation will
fill the airspace randomly with traffic, and after
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
| gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
|
5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 6 ---

Figure 1 TMX Graphical User Interface
The main screen of TMX consists of:
1. The radar window (main window) displays the 4. The strip window (lower right-hand corner)
simulated traffic in a map perspective with displays so-called aircraft strips of one or more
coastlines for geographical orientation and user selected aircraft and aircraft that are involved
defined sector and airspace boundaries. Other in a conflict. The strips display call-sign,
display features are CPA location in case of a origin, destination, altitude, heading, speed and
conflict (amber and red lines), aircraft FMS rate of climb.
routes (magenta lines), the location of
navigational aids, and even the runway layout 5. The altitude bar (right of main window)
of some airports. displays the altitude of the traffic on the radar
window. When creating a new aircraft this bar
2. The button bar (below main window) allows can also be used to quickly select the desired
the user to bypass command line inputs by aircraft type, altitude and speed by clicking on
using a pointing device. The button bar the bar, instead of using the command line.
consists of two rows of buttons. The top row
selects a sub set of buttons on the second row.
The function of each button and the menu
structure of the buttons is completely
configurable by the user by means of a data
file. The buttons can be used to store often
used commands as well as complete macros.
3. The console/command window (lower left-
hand corner) allows the user to enter
commands with the keyboard at the command
line prompt. This console can also be used for
the prompting of relevant messages, such as
events, errors or warnings.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
|
gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
|
5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 7 ---

Figure 2 Aircraft Navigation Display
The main radar window can be replaced by an pilot model. TMX is capable of simulating up to
alternative screen showing a simple aircraft 1000 fully equipped aircraft at a time. The
navigation display for both the horizontal and performance data for simulating different type of
vertical situation, as shown in Figure 2. Moreover, aircraft is based on the Eurocontrol Base-of-
tape gauges for the aircraft actual and selected Aircraft Data (BADA)9.
speed and vertical speed are also available. This Aircraft state information for all traffic is
view can be selected for any aircraft within the available in three levels: true state, perceived state
traffic simulation. This feature enables a quick and received ADS-B state. The aircraft simulation
view into the cockpit of an aircraft and makes it delivers the true state of the aircraft. The perceived
easy to understand strange conflict geometries and state of the aircraft will usually differ from the true
corresponding resolutions. It also is very useful for state because of sensor errors. A sensor model
taking control of an aircraft during on-line makes it possible to introduce these sensor errors.
simulation. The perceived state is used for transmitting the
aircraft state over ADS-B.
Architecture Breakdown The ADS-B received state differs from the
transmitted in update rate. ADS-B messages are
TMX is constructed in a modular way. It’s not
transmitted with a selectable update rate. Between
possible to describe the complete architecture of
two transmits the received ADS-B data is
TMX in this paper and therefore only the higher
extrapolated based on the last received data. The
level architecture will be presented. Figure 3 shows
ADS-B model also contains a probability of lost
the overall top level architecture of TMX with its
messages and transponder failures.
main components. The heart of TMX is the traffic
simulation of multiple aircraft. In order to simulate
autonomous (Free Flight) traffic TMX can simulate ASAS Simulation
CD&R functionality for each aircraft. The scenario Aircraft will detect and resolve conflicts depending
and simulation control component is needed to on the selected CD&R algorithms in the ASAS
initialise and control the traffic simulation and module. Many different CD&R algorithms have
other components within TMX. As already been developed and can be selected by their CD&R
mentioned the GUI is split into an information algorithm number. Both state-based and aircraft
presentation and a user input part. The remaining intent algorithms are available. CD&R
modules in the top level breakdown take care of characteristics can be set by means of parameters.
communication with other simulations. A closer CD&R and all other simulation parameters can be
look into the architecture is given in Figure 4. In set in a scenario file and changed on-line by
the following subsections the main components entering new values on the command line.
will be described in more detail. It is also possible to create a so-called mixed-
equipped traffic environment, by simulating both
Traffic Simulation controlled and autonomous aircraft at the same
time. The ASAS equipage is an option that can be
For the traffic simulation six-degrees-of-freedom
selected for each aircraft individually.
aircraft models are used with auto-flight
functionality, 4D FMS guidance functionality and a
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
|
gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
|
5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 8 ---

Figure 3 Top Level Architecture TMX
Figure 4 Mid level Architecture TMX
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
|
gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
|
5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 9 ---

Figure 5 Ethernet Connections with TMX
Besides CD&R, this module also contains Interfaces to External Simulations
conflict prevention in the form of the so-called
The wide range of interfaces contained in TMX
Predictive ASAS (PASAS). PASAS is used to
makes it a very versatile traffic simulation tool.
prevent aircraft from maneuvering into a conflict. It
Because TMX can be hooked up to almost any
also prevents automated traffic from turning back
simulator and even to flight hardware of a research
into the same conflict over and over again after
aircraft, its application for Free Flight research is
executing a conflict resolution.
limitless.
In the first place TMX can be hooked up
Scenario and Simulation Control to any aircraft simulator, from desktop till motion
TMX is event driven. Its central element is a so- base simulator, if it can provide basic aircraft state
called Command Stack. Every module in the TMX information. The connected simulator will become
is controlled by one or more commands. The user part of the traffic simulation within TMX and can
enters commands via the GUI, or commands are interact with every aircraft in the simulation. Even
read from a recorded or edited scenario file. The multiple simulators can be linked directly to TMX.
scenario file contains a list of time stamped TMX will provide each simulator with ADS-B
commands. Each command in the scenario file is traffic and CD&R information for the cockpit
put on the Command Stack at the simulation time displays and warning system. If use is made of
stated in its timestamp. Commands also can be intent information for CD&R the FMS of the
received through ethernet from any other module in simulator must also be connected to TMX in order
the simulation configuration. to collect flight plan data. This basic direct link
The Command Stack works as a First In between TMX and aircraft simulators is depicted in
First Out (FIFO) buffer. The first command in the Figure 5.
stack is passed to the Process Command module. It is also possible to connect simulators to
Process Command interprets the command and TMX using the DIS standard. This may be a
executes all needed actions and sets appropriate number of flight simulators, another traffic
parameters. If scenario recording is activated all simulator or a combination of both. Besides DIS
executed commands will be time stamped and also a High Level Architecture (HLA) interface is
written to the selected scenario file. available.
This module also contains the data logging Yet another way to connect to TMX is
function. As already mentioned TMX contains a through the internet. TMX can host a web session
number of statistical functions that gather that allows desktop simulators to log on to the
performance numbers about the traffic simulation. traffic simulation in progress. Each simulator that
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
|
gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
|
5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 10 ---

logs on gets assigned to an aircraft already part of CONCLUSION
the traffic simulation and will take over control of TMX has earned its “wings” in Free Flight research
this aircraft. The simulator will send out its current over the past years. It has been used very
state information; position, altitude, speed, vertical successfully in many research projects often
speed and track. TMX will send the simulator all concerned with Free Flight. One of the most
state information of all surrounding traffic. In this important reasons for this success is the
case the CD&R algorithms are contained in the development philosophy which made it possible to
remote simulator. Performance and CD&R have new research capabilities available in short
information is send to TMX for data logging. time. Its flexible set-up and the ability to link it to
external simulators make TMX an extremely useful
tool for simulating a realistic traffic environment.
TMX RESEARCH PROJECTS The combination of the traffic environment
The first research project that made use of TMX simulation with multiple real-time human-in-the-
was the NLR Free Flight project that started out in loop simulators is ideal for validating new ATM
19971. This project was carried out in collaboration concepts from an airborne perspective.
with NASA, the FAA and the RLD (Dutch Civil Because of the wide range of capabilities
Aviation Authorities). This collaboration in Free of TMX, it also is used in many experiments that
Flight research is still continued. One of the results don’t involve Free Flight research. One of the
of the close collaboration with NASA is the use of strongest points of TMX which sets it apart from
TMX in research projects at NASA as part of the other traffic simulators, is the capability to simulate
Advanced Air Transport Technology (AATT) in real-time a large number of up to 1000 fully
program. A description of an example research equipped aircraft (including FMS, ASAS, ADS-B)
study can be found in reference 10. at a time.
After the first few years of Free Flight
research, also a number of European projects were
initiated. The Free Flight - Flight Management REFERENCES
System (3FMS)11 project was the first European
Free Flight project that made use of TMX. For this 1. Hoekstra, J.M., Ruigrok, R., van Gent,
project TMX had to be fitted with new CD&R R.N.W.H., Visser, J., Gijsbers, B., Valenti
algorithms that take into account the aircraft’s Clari, M.S.V., Heesbeen, W.W.M., Hilburn,
intent information. Part of the resolution with intent B.G., Groeneweg, J. and Bussink, F.J.L.,
information was implemented in NLR’s Research “Overview of NLR Free Flight Project 1997-
Flight Management System (RFMS). 1999”, Project Report, National Aerospace
The INTENT project12, as the name Laboratory NLR, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
implies, addressed also and in more detail the use May 2000
of intent information for CD&R. The “intent”
CD&R algorithms were refined and extended. The 2. Valenti Clari M.S.V., “Cost-Benefit Analysis
new algorithms were developed and tested in TMX of Conflict Resolution Manoeuvres in Free
but they were extracted from TMX and put into the Flight”, M.Sc. Thesis, Delft University of
RFMS for the on-line simulation experiment. This Technology, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering,
resulted in a FMS with integrated ASAS Flight Mechanics group, Aug 1998
functionality.
Other projects that made use of TMX are 3. Valenti Clari, M.S.V., “Cost-benefit Study of
for instance the Mediterranean Free Flight (MFF)7 Free Flight with Airborne Separation
project and the More Autonomous Aircraft in the Assurance”, Air Traffic Control Quarterly,
Future Air Traffic Management System (MA- Volume 9 (4), USA, 2001
AFAS)13 project.
Because of the wide range of capabilities 4. Hoekstra, J.M., Ruigrok, R.J.C. and van Gent,
of TMX, it also is used in many experiments that R.N.W.H., “Free Flight in a Crowded
don’t involve Free Flight research. A number of Airspace?”, Third USA/Europe Air Traffic
military projects use TMX as well. More Management R&D Seminar, Napoli, 13-16
information about Free Flight research at NLR and June 2000
even a demo version of TMX can be found on the
Free Flight web site of the NLR14. 5. Valenti Clari M.S.V., “Research Flight
Simulation of Future Autonomous Aircraft
Operations”, 2002 Winter Simulation
Conference, Conference, San Diego, California,
US, Dec 2002
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
| gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
| 5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD

--- Page 11 ---

6. Hoekstra, J.M., van Gent, R.N.W.H. and ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS
Groeneweg, J., “Airborne Separation Assurance
Validation with multiple Humans-in-the-Loop”, 3FMS Free Flight - Flight Management
The Fifth International Air Traffic Management System
Seminar ATM-2003, Budapest, Hungary, June AATT Advanced Air Transport
2003 Technology
ADS-B Automatic Dependent
7. Mediterranean Free Flight web site: Surveillance Broadcast
http://www.medff.it/ ASAS Airborne Separation Assurance
System
8. NASA General Aviation Program Office, ATM Air Traffic Management
“Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) BADA Base-of-Aircraft Data
Program Planning White Paper”, September 19, CD&R Conflict Detection & Resolution
2000 CDTI Cockpit Display with Traffic
Information
9. Eurocontrol Experimental Centre (1997). CPA Closest Point of Approach
“User Manual for the Base of Aircraft Data DIS Distributed Interactive Simulation
(BADA)” Revision 2.5, EEC Note 1/97, FAA Federal Aviation Authority
Eurocontrol, 1997 FIFO First In First Out
FMS Flight Management System
10. Wing, D J.; Barmore, B. E.; and FreeSim Free Flight Desktop Simulation
Krishnamurthy, K.: Use of Traffic Intent GUI Graphical User Interface
Information by Autonomous Aircraft in HLA High Level Architecture
Constrained Operations. AIAA-2002-4555, IP Internet Protocol
August 2002 MCP Mode Control Panel
MFF Mediterranean Free Flight
11. Ferro, Daniel, “The impact of Human Factors MVP Modified Voltage Potential
on Airborne Separation Assurance System NASA National Aeronautics and Space
(ASAS)”, Third USA/Europe Air Traffic Administration
Management R&D Seminar, Napoli, 13-16 NLR Nationaal Lucht- en Ruimtevaart-
June 2000. laboratorium (National
Aerospace Laboratory)
12. INTENT Consortium, “INTENT D1-1 Project PASAS Predictive Airborne Separation
Scope, Relevant Results from Other Projects, Assurance System
Activities and Initiatives”, 2001, RFMS Research Flight Management
http://www.nlr.nl/public/hosted- System
sites/intent/intent.htm RFS Research Flight Simulator
RLD Rijks Luchtvaart Dienst (Dutch
13. More Autonomous Aircraft in the Future Air Aviation Authority)
Traffic Management System web site: SATS Small Aircraft Transportation
http://www.ma-afas.com/ System
TCP Transmission Control Protocol
14. NLR Free Flight web site: TMX Traffic Manager
http://www.nlr.nl/public/hosted-sites/freeflight VFR Visual Flight Rules
1 0
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8635-3002.6/4152.01
:IOD
| gro.aaia.cra//:ptth
| 5102
,8
yraunaJ
no
TFLED
TIETISREVINU
EHCSINHCET
yb
dedaolnwoD
View publication stats