

--- Page 1 ---

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267474879
Validation of a Tuning Method for Haptic Shared Control Using
Neuromuscular System Analysis
Conference Paper · October 2014
DOI: 10.1109/SMC.2014.6974128
CITATIONS READS
6 188
4 authors:
Emmanuel Sunil Jan Smisek
Netherlands Aerospace Centre Transcelestial Technologies
38 PUBLICATIONS 566 CITATIONS 27 PUBLICATIONS 805 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Marinus M. Van Paassen Max Mulder
Delft University of Technology Delft University of Technology
490 PUBLICATIONS 6,819 CITATIONS 585 PUBLICATIONS 7,569 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jan Smisek on 29 October 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- Page 2 ---

Validation of a Tuning Method for Haptic Shared
Control Using Neuromuscular System Analysis
Emmanuel Sunil, Jan Smisek, Marinus M. van Paassen and Max Mulder
Abstract—Thisresearchinvestigatesaneuromuscularanalysis but at the cost of increased workload [4], [5]. Other imple-
basedtuningprocedureforhapticsharedcontrolsystemsthathas mentations of HSC have also reported similar issues [2].
beenhypothesizedtoimprovesubjectiveoperatorworkloadwhen
These early examples of HSC used heuristic tuning of
compared to heuristic tuning methods. Here, the tuning proce-
haptic moments with the aim of optimizing overall system
duretakesintoconsiderationtheresponseoftheneuromuscular
system to haptic cues. Human arm stiffness, the neuromuscular performance. Recent research has shown that heuristic tuning
property of concern, can be changed by modulating reflex can result in disagreements between the human operator and
strength. The ‘relax task’ setting of the neuromuscular system, the automation on a haptic level [6]. The difficulty with
for which reflexes are minimized, is chosen as the design point
heuristic tuning has been attributed to the large adaptation
for tuning haptic cues as it is hypothesized to lead to the
range of the Neuromuscular System (NMS), which is able to
lowest workload. A simulated haptic collision avoidance system
for unmanned aircraft teleoperation is used as a platform to adapt its properties such that performance and overall system
experimentallyvalidatethetuningmethod.Theresultsshowthat stability are satisfactory, regardless of the specific tuning
the novel tuning procedure, particularly for relax task tuning, used. However, adaptations to ‘non-optimal’ settings of the
substantially improves workload and situational awareness over
NMS, as is often the case with heuristic tuning methods, can
conditions that ignores the neuromuscular system. Additionally,
cause haptic cues to be perceived as ‘too strong’, resulting in
over-tuning,whichfrequentlyoccursforheuristicmethods,leads
toworseuseracceptancethanaconditionwithouthapticsupport. increased user discomfort and workload over time [7].
Index Terms—Tuning haptic shared control, neuromuscular The goal of this research is to experimentally validate a
admittance,haptichuman-machineinterface,force-feedbacksup- novelneuromuscularanalysisbasedtuningprocedureforHSC.
port system, human-centered design, unmanned aerial vehicle
Here, haptic cues are tuned to match a so called ‘design neu-
(UAV), collision avoidance.
romuscular setting’ where properties of the NMS are known
I. INTRODUCTION and are desirable for the control task under consideration [7],
[8]. This method may enable the NMS to adapt to a tuning
InHapticSharedControl(HSC)systems,ahumanoperator
setting that is based on its own properties, thus possibly re-
and an automatic controller share control of a process by si-
ducing conflicts and improving the haptic interaction between
multaneouslyexertingguidanceforces/momentsonacommon
the human operator and the automation. The aforementioned
Control Interface (CI). The resulting position of the CI is the
HCAS is used as a platform to experimentally test the new
only input to the controlled process. This distinct property of
method,usingNMSmeasurementstakenbySmiseketal.[9].
HSCensuresthatthehumanoperatoriscontinuouslyinformed
The paper begins with descriptions of the HCAS and the
about the intentions of the automation, allowing the operator
neuromuscular analysis based tuning procedure in Section II
to actively take part in the decision making process through
and Section III respectively. This is followed in Section IV
intuitive haptic interactions [1]. For these reasons, HSC has
withthedesignandresultsoftheexperiment.Finally,themain
been proposed as a control paradigm that has the potential
conclusions are summarized in Section V.
to overcome some of the human-machine interaction issues
frequently associated with pure manual and automatic control II. HAPTICCOLLISIONAVOIDANCESYSTEM
systems [1], [2].
This study uses the HCAS as the framework for testing a
NumerousexamplesofHSCcanbefoundinliteraturewith
newHSC tuning procedure. Therefore the functionality of the
applicationsrangingfromteleroboticstovehicularcontrol[2],
HCAS is briefly outlined in this section.
[3]. An interesting application of HSC in aviation is the use
of haptic feedback to improve the safety of Unmanned Aerial A. System Architecture
Vehicles (UAVs). This interface, termed the Haptic Collision A block diagram schematic of the HCAS is depicted in
Avoidance System (HCAS), augments visual feedback from Fig.1.Hereitcanbeseenthattheoutervisualfeedbackloop
onboard cameras with haptic guidance moments applied on oftheUAVteleoperatoriscomplementedwithaninnerhaptic
a control-loaded side-stick to help teleoperators in steering a feedback loop originating from an automatic controller. Like
UAVawayfromobstacles[4].Experimentshaveindicatedthat other HSC systems, the automatic controller can be divided
the HCAS significantly improved the safety of teleoperation, into two separate components or ‘mappings’ [6]. The first
mapping, which replicates the visual/cognitive control task
The authors are with the Control and Simulation division, Faculty of
of the teleoperator, is performed by a so called ‘Parametric
Aerospace Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Kluyverweg 1,
2629HSDelft,TheNetherlands.Email:e.sunil@tudelft.nl Risk Field’ (PRF). The PRF, a type of Artificial Force Field

--- Page 3 ---

Haptic Coupling A. Properties of the Human Neuromuscular System
HumanTeleoperator
XRef +- XError C C o o g n n t i r t o iv l e θDesired NMS MNMS ++ MTotal Side-Stick θst UAV XUAV With respect to the tuning of the haptic controller, an
Mapping 1 Mapping 2 important dynamic property of the NMS is its admittance
MGuidance
Mapping 2 Mapping 1 to external (haptic) forces/moments. Admittance is formally
Haptic Parametric
Controller Risk RiskField defined as the “causal relationship between moment (input)
AutomaticController
and hand position (output)” [3]. It can be “thought of as a
Environment
Visual Feedback, XUAV measure of the displacement that a moment causes” [3]. In
practical terms, admittance is equal to the ‘inverse stiffness’
Fig.1. Hapticcollisionavoidancesystem(HCAS)architecture,basedonthe
of the NMS (at low external moment/excitation frequencies
principlesofhapticsharedcontrol(HSC).A‘haptic-coupling’existsbetween
the neuromuscular system (NMS) and the side-stick, as long as physical i.e.,≤2[Hz])[3].Additionally,empiricalevidencehasfound
contactismaintained. that admittance is dependent on the magnitude and direction
of manual control (moment) inputs applied on the CI [8], [9].
(AFF), scans the environment for obstacles and computes the
The NMS is highly adaptive as admittance can be varied
corresponding risk of collision [10]. This risk is converted
over a wide range of values through two physiological mech-
to a haptic guidance moment, M , by the ‘haptic
Guidance
anisms: fast subconscious spinal reflexes and muscle pair co-
controller’. The function of the haptic controller is similar to
contraction [3]. Using these two mechanisms, humans can be
that of the NMS and it constitutes the second mapping of the
instructed to respond to external moments in three distinct
automation. The tuning of this second mapping is the focus
ways known in literature as the force (FT), relax (RT) and
of the current research.
position (PT) tasks [3], see Table I.
The haptic guidance moment, M , and the moment
Guidance
generated by the teleoperator NMS, M , act together on B. Neuromuscular Admittance Based Tuning Method
NMS
the side-stick, and its resulting position, θ st , dictates the sole HapticguidancemomentsappliedontheCIaretransmitted
steering command issued to the UAV. In terms of collision to the human operator via his/her NMS. Therefore it is
avoidance assistance, the magnitude of M Guidance indicates necessary to include the response of the NMS to haptic cues
the severity of a potential collision, whilst its direction sug- when tuning the haptic controller [6], [7]. Effectively, this
gests a collision avoidance steering maneuver that the teleop- approachusesthecombinedstiffness(i.e.,inverseadmittance)
erator can follow to safely navigate around obstacles. of the NMS and the CI to compute haptic cues, see Fig. 2.
For the HCAS, the resulting tuning law can be expressed as:
B. Division of Control Authority
The division of control authority between the human op- M Risk
erator and the automation is influenced mainly by the tuning
GuidanceX = [K NMS(θst)+K st] X (1)
of the haptic controller [1]. To promote safe system operation
" M GuidanceY#
combined system stiffness
" Risk Y#
in the event of automation failures, the human operator must Here K NMS is the | stiffness {z of the N } MS and K st is
always have the ability to overrule the automation. Conse- the stiffness of the side-stick CI. The ‘risk vector’ in eq. 1
quently, the haptic controller must be designed to ensure that represents the output of the PRF i.e, the first mapping of the
M Guidance is always less than M NMS . automation, see Fig. 1. Note that the tuning law accounts for
The primary objective for early implementations of the the dependence of K NMS on the magnitude and direction
HCAS (and other forms of HSC) was to improve system per- of manual control inputs applied on the side-stick, θst. Thus
formance and safety over pure manual control. To realize this K NMS and K st are defined separately along the longitudinal
goal, the haptic controller was typically tuned using heuris- (X) and lateral (Y) hand/stick axes:
tic methods, often resulting in very strong haptic guidance
moments. While ‘over-tuning’ haptic cues improved safety,
it also biased control authority towards the automation [5]. K NMS(θst)=
K
NMSX
(θst) 0
(2)
As a result, many subjects complained that haptic moments " 0 K NMSY (θst)#
felt too difficult to override, causing high subjective operator
K 0
workload [5]. To improve user acceptance of HSC systems, it K st = stX (3)
isnecessarytotunehapticcuessuchthatworkloadisreduced " 0 K stY#
withoutsacrificingsystemsafety,norhumancontrolauthority
TABLEI
over the automation.
DESCRIPTIONOFTHETHREENEUROMUSCULARTASKINSTRUCTIONS
III. TUNINGHAPTICFEEDBACK Task Admittance Description
Yield to haptic moments and the
This section introduces a new ‘human-centered’ tuning ForceTask(FT) High
motionofcontrolinterface
approach for haptic cues that is based on properties and Donotreacttohapticmomentsand
RelaxTask(RT) Medium
measurements of the NMS. First, neuromuscular properties followmotionofcontrolinterface
relevant to the tuning approach are presented. Subsequently, Resist haptic moments and main-
PositionTask(PT) Low
tainpositionofcontrolinterface
the theoretical rationale behind the approach is explained.

--- Page 4 ---

Anelectro-hydraulicside-stickwasusedformanualcontrol
oftheUAVandtosupplyhapticcollisionavoidancemoments.
Second order dynamics with an inertia I = 0.02 [kgm2],
st
a damping coefficient B = 0.2 [Nms/rad], and a spring
st
constant K = 2.0 [Nm/rad] were simulated on both stick
st
axes. The length of the side-stick, from the axis of rotation to
the middle of the hand, was 0.09 [m].
The UAV was modeled as an ‘easy-to-fly’ helicopter with
a rotor diameter of 3.0 [m] [4]. Longitudinal side-stick inputs
were mapped to velocity commands (max 5.0 [m/s]), whereas
lateral inputs were mapped to yaw rate commands (max 0.32
[rad/s]). The UAV altitude was kept constant by an autopilot.
Fig.2. Rationalebehindthenoveltuningprocedure[9].Hereitisproposed 3) HapticControllerImplementation: Thehapticcontroller
thatahapticguidancemomentcorrespondingtothecombinedsystemstiffness was implemented using the average RT admittance of ten
i.e.,stiffnessofstick+designneuromuscularstiffness,hastobeprovidedby
subjects measured by Smisek et al. [9], at a measure-
thehapticcontrollertoobtainthedesired,oroptimal,stickdeflection.
ment/excitationsignalfrequencyof0.5[Hz].Inthatstudy,RT
Toimplementthetuningmethoddescribedabove,anappropri- admittance was measured in the presence of manual control
atevalueforK NMS hastobeselected.Threepossibledesign inputsonatwodegreeoffreedomCI.Asaresult,thecompiled
options correspond to the stiffness/admittance profiles of FT, dataismorerepresentativeofneuromusculardynamicsduring
RT and PT neuromuscular task instructions, see Table I. real-life control tasks when compared to previous admittance
In this study, the relax task (RT) stiffness is selected as the measurement techniques (where identification was usually
design point for tuning the haptic controller. This is because performedwithoutvoluntarymanualcontrolinputs).Formore
reflexesarenaturallysuppressedwhenperformingtheRTand details on the admittance identification procedure, the reader
thepropertiesoftheNMSaremainlydependentonitsintrinsic is referred to [9].
stiffnessanddampingcharacteristics[3].Consequently,theRT To study the dependence of admittance on the magnitude
leadstothelowestphysicalactivityofthethreeneuromuscular and direction of manual control inputs, Smisek et al. [9]
taskinstructions,thustheselectionoftheRTiscloselyaligned measured admittance for thirteen different conditions, see
with the goal of reducing workload for HSC. Using RT Fig. 4. This dependence is taken into account when tuning
admittancemeasurementstakenbySmiseketal.[9],thetuning the haptic controller by using nearest neighbor interpolation
method can be tested in the context of the HCAS.
IV. HUMAN-IN-THE-LOOP-EXPERIMENT
To validate the novel tuning method described in Sec-
tion III-B, a human-in-the-loop experiment that simulated
UAV teleoperation was conducted using a repeated-measures
design. This section presents the design and results of the
experiment.
A. Experiment Design
Fig.3. Fixed-baseflightsimulatorwithaircraftchair(1),hydraulicside-stick
1) SubjectsandTaskInstruction: Twelveright-handedmale
(2),navigationdisplay(3)andonboardcameraview(4)
subjects, with an average age of 23.4 years (σ = 0.7 years),
tookpartintheexperiment.Subjectconsentwasobtainedprior
totheexperimentandnomonetarycompensationwasoffered.
During the experiment, subjects were required to perform
a UAV remote sensing task in an obstacle laden urban en-
vironment. Subjects were instructed, in order of priority, to
avoid collisions, fly as closely as possible through the center
of waypoints (represented as smoke plumes), and to perform
thetaskasquicklyaspossible.Toimproveexperimentrealism,
eachcollisionresultedinatwentysecondtimepenaltyduring
which the experiment was paused.
2) Apparatus: A fixed-base flight simulator was used to
perform the experiment, see Fig. 3. Visual cues of the sur-
roundings were projected on a wall in front of the subject,
Fig.4. RTadmittanceidentificationresultsforonesubject(f =0.5[Hz]),
originatingfromasimulatedonboardcamerafixedtothelon-
forthethirteenmanualcontrolinputconditionsusedbySmiseketal.[9].The
gitudinal axis of the UAV. Additionally, a navigation display lengthofthemajorandtheminoraxesofeachellipseindicatestheadmittance
with a ‘top-down’ view was provided. alongthesetwodirectionsforallmeasurementconditions.

--- Page 5 ---

(oftheinstantaneousteleoperatormanualcontrolinput’smag- TABLEII
nitude and direction) to determine the nearest measurement EXPERIMENTCONDITIONS
condition visualized in Fig. 4. Subsequently, the measured
Symbol Description
NMS admittance/stiffness values for the ‘nearest condition’
1 NHF Nohapticfeedback/puremanualcontrol
(K and K ) are used to compute appropriate
NMSX NMSY HC tuned based on relax task admittance data col-
haptic cues using eq. 1. It is hoped that this dynamic tuning 2 RT lectedbySmiseket.al[9](fdist =0.5Hz)
approach will allow the haptic controller to better anticipate 3 UT HCunder-tunedrelativetoRT(UT =0.5RT)
the real time stiffness of the NMS, and consequently improve 4 OT HCover-tunedrelativetoRT(OT =2RT)
the teleoperator’s appreciation of haptic cues.
4) Independent Variables: Two categories of independent TABLEIII
EXPERIMENTDEPENDENTMEASURES
variables were defined for the experiment. The first category
was concerned with the tuning profile (TP) of the haptic
Measure Symbol Description
controller (HC). A total of four TPs were tested, resulting Safety ncollisions Numberofcollisions[-]
in the four experiment conditions listed in Table II. Here, UT V Meanvelocity[m/s]
Performance
and OT controllers represent TPs that are half and twice as dwp Mindistancetowaypoints[m]
strongasRTtuning,respectively.ThesetwoTPsweredefined Standard deviation of stick rate
to study the sensitivity of the novel tuning procedure. ControlActivity σ δ˙st [rad/s]
Standard deviation of haptic guid-
The second independent variable was obstacle (OB) and HapticActivity σMGuidance
ancemoment[Nm]
sixobstacles,displayedasbuildingsofdifferentshapes,made
NASATLX Workloadassessmentsurvey
up the virtual environment of the remote sensing task, see
Subjective SA Situationalawarenesssurvey
Fig. 5. Each obstacle was designed to evoke different control HA Hapticfeedbackacceptancesurvey
behavior. Obstacles were arranged randomly to create three
measurementandthreetrainingtrajectoriestoreduceboredom with pairwise Bonferroni corrected comparisons used as post-
and learning effects. hoc tests. To comply with ANOVA assumptions, Greenhouse-
5) Dependent Measures: The dependent measures used to Geissercorrectionswereappliedtothedegreesoffreedomfor
compare different TPs are described in Table III. non-spherical data. Ordinal dependent measures (n
collisions
6) Procedure: The experiment began with a training ses- andsubjectivequestionnaires)wereinspectedusingtheFried-
siontoallowsubjectstopracticecontrollingtheUAVwiththe man test with Wilcoxon signed-rank tests used for post-hoc
aidofhapticcues.Afterward,subjectsflewfourmeasurement analysis (also with Bonferroni corrections).
runsforeachTP.Experimentconditionswererandomizedand
1) Safety: Fig. 6a shows that the number of collisions,
subjects had no prior knowledge of the conditions performed.
n , decreased with increasing strength of the haptic
collisions
At the end of each condition, subjective workload (using
controller,and wasthelowestforthe OTcondition. However,
NASA TLX), situational awareness (SA) and haptic feedback
theFriedmantestrevealedonlyamarginallysignificanteffect
acceptance (HA) were measured using questionnaires. The of TP on n (TP: χ2(3) = 7.48, p = 0.058). This
collisions
totaldurationoftheexperiment,includingtraining,breaksand
statistical artifact may be due to the very few collisions that
the pre-experiment briefing was 2 hours.
occurred for the entire experiment. In fact, total n
collisions
B. Experiment Results and Discussion for all conditions was found to be significantly lower than
previous experiments with the HCAS [4], [5]. This could be
All objective dependent measures, except subjective ques-
a result of the twenty second collision penalty applied in this
tionnaires,werecomputedperobstacletotakeintoaccountthe
workthatencouragedsubjectstoflyassafelyaspossible.The
different order of obstacles in each trajectory. Subsequently,
Friedman test did show a highly significant effect of OB on
the effects of the independent variables (TP and OB) on the
dependent variables were analyzed using statistical methods.
n
collisions
,(OB:χ2(5)=17.31,p≤0.01).Obstacle5,which
resultedinthehighestnumberofcollisions,wasalsoreported
Interval/ratio dependent measures were studied using full-
by subjects to be the most difficult, see Fig. 6b.
factorial repeated-measures ANOVA (Analysis of Variance),
2) Performance: The mean velocity of the UAV, V, is
shown in Fig. 6c. Here it can be seen that for a particular
obstacle, V was relatively constant for all haptic controllers,
resulting in no statistical significance of TP on V. On the
other hand, V varied substantially with OB, causing a highly
significant effect (OB: F2.39,26.29 =107.16,p≤0.01). When
comparing Fig. 6c with Fig. 6b, it can be seen that velocity
tends to be lower for obstacles with a higher number of
collisions.ThisindicatesthatsubjectsdecreasedUAVvelocity
inanattempttofollowtheprimarytaskinstructionofavoiding
Fig.5. Anexampletrajectorycomposedofsixobstaclesarrangedrandomly.
collisions, particularly for difficult obstacles.
Waypoints are pictured as red stars. Trajectories took approximately two
minutesandthirtysecondstocomplete(whenflownwithoutcollisions). SimilartoV,theminimumdistancetowaypoints,d ,was
wp

--- Page 6 ---

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
NHF UT RT OT
snoisilloC
fo
rebmuN
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1 2 3 4 5 6
Tuning Profile
(a)ncollisionsTP
snoisilloC
fo
rebmuN
Obstacle
(b)ncollisionsOB
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5 1 2 3 4 5 6
]s/m[
2.2
1.8
1.4
1
0.6
0.2 1 4 5 6
Obstacle
(c)V
]m[
differences between all three haptic controllers (p≤0.01). In
terms of OB, variations increased from obstacle 1 to 6, a sta-
tistically significant effect (OB: F2.66,29.24 =6.50,p≤0.05).
Variations of the lateral haptic guidance moment,
σ , are much greater for obstacles 4-6 when com- MGuidanceY
paredtoobstacles1-3,ahighlysignificanteffect(OB:F2,22 =
9.57,p≤0.01), see Fig 7d. Unsurprisingly, OT produced the
largest σ
MGuidanceX
for all obstacles (TP: F2,22 = 9.57,p ≤
0.01).Post-hoctestsshowednosignificantdifferencesbetween
UT and RT controllers.
It is interesting to note that haptic activity decreased in
the lateral direction, while control activity was found to be
higherlaterally.DuetothefeedbackarchitectureoftheHCAS,
greaterlateralstickmotioncombinedwithadecreaseinlateral
haptic activity implies that subjects were more willing to
followlateralhapticcues.Thisresultmaybecloselyrelatedto
Obstacle
thelimitedlateralvisualcuesprovided,forcingsubjectstorely
(d)dwp
on lateral haptic guidance moments for collision avoidance.
Fig.6. Meansand95%confidenceintervalsofsafetyandperformancerelated
5) Subjective Questionnaires: Fig. 8a displays overall
dependent variables. Obstacles 2 and 3 did not have smoke plumes serving
aswaypoints.NHF(brown),UT(red),RT(green)andOT(cyan). workload,orZ-score,computedusingtheNASATLXsubjec-
tive questionnaire. Here a lower subjective rating symbolizes
not influenced by TP, but affected significantly by OB (OB:
lower workload. A Friedman test showed that there was a
F3,33 = 296.79,p ≤ 0.01), see Fig. 6d. Moreover, it can be highly significant effect of TP on overall workload (TLX:
seen that d wp followed the same trend as n collisionsOB and χ2(3) = 18.10, p ≤ 0.01). Post-hoc analysis using the
obstacles with more collisions had higher d . This provides
wp Wilcoxontestrevealedthatsignificantdifferenceswerecaused
additional evidence that subjects employed a conservative
bytheextremeconditions,NHFandOT,whichhadthehighest
control strategy when tackling difficult obstacles.
workload levels. However, no substantial differences were
Basedontheseresults,itisclearthatTPhadnomeasurable recorded between UT and RT, and these two controllers led
effect on performance. This may be due to subjects adapting to the lowest measured workload. These results suggest that
their control strategies to ensure that task instructions are including the response of the NMS when computing haptic
followed with similar performance for all TPs. This suggests cues,asforRT,candecreaseoverallsubjectiveworkloadwith
that it is difficult to select an appropriate tuning setting using respect to NHF.
performance metrics alone. ThesixworkloadsourcesoftheNASATLXarepicturedin
3) Control Activity: The standard deviation of the longitu- Figs. 8b to 8g. The reduction of overall workload for UT/RT
dinal side-stick deflection rate, σ˙ , is pictured in Fig. 7a. comparedtoNHFcanbetracedbacktoareductionofmental
δstX
For all obstacles, σ˙ was the smallest for NHF and the load (ML) and effort (EF) for these two haptic controllers
δstX
largest for OT, a highly significant effect (TP: F1.33,14.59 =
19.56,p ≤ 0.01). Fig. 7a also shows that σ δ ˙ stX was signif- 0.6
icantly lower for obstacle 2 (OB: F1.93,21.27 = 42.80,p ≤ 0.5
0.01). 0.4
In the lateral direction, σ˙ was also the highest for the 0.3
δstY
OT controller (TP: F3,33 = 17.57,p ≤ 0.01), see Fig. 7b. 0.2
Similar to the longitudinal direction, post-hoc tests revealed 0.1
no significant differences between UT and RT for σ˙ . As 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
δstY
no turns are necessary to complete obstacle 2, this obstacle
resulted in the lowest σ˙ , a highly significant effect (OB:
δstY
F1.93,21.27 =25.95,p≤0.01).
For most cases, control activity was higher in the lateral
direction. This can be explained by the continuous corrective
lateral stick inputs required to meet the secondary objective
of flying through the center of waypoints.
4) HapticActivity: Thestandarddeviationofthelongitudi-
nal haptic guidance moment, σ , shown in Fig. 7c, MGuidanceX
increased with increasing strength of the haptic controller,
an effect of high statistical significance (TP: F1.35,14.87 =
75.88,p ≤ 0.01). Post-hoc tests showed highly significant
]s/dar[
0.45
0.35
0.25
0.15
0.05 1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(a)σ δst˙
X
]s/dar[
Obstacle
(b)σ δs˙tY
2.6
2.2
1.8
1.4
1
0.6
0.2
1 2 3 4 5 6
]mN[
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1 2 3 4 5 6
Obstacle
(c)σMGuidanceX
]mN[
Obstacle
(d)σMGuidanceY
Fig. 7. Means and 95% confidence intervals of control and haptic activity
relateddependentvariables.NHF(brown),UT(red),RT(green)andOT(cyan).

--- Page 7 ---

the under-tuned and the relax task tuned haptic controllers
100 100 100
when compared to pure manual control. Additionally, the
80 80 80
60 60 60 results suggested that over-tuning the haptic controller, as is
40 40 40 usuallythecaseforheuristictuningmethods,yieldsloweruser
20 20 20 acceptance than the condition with no haptic support. These
0 0 0
NHF UT RT OT NHF UT RT OT NHF UT RT OT resultsstronglyindicatethatincludingneuromuscularresponse
(a)TLXZ (b)TLXMental (c)TLXPhysical inthehapticcontrollertuningprocedureimprovesoveralluser
acceptance the system.
100 100 100
Formostdependentvariables,nostatisticaldifferenceswere
80 80 80
60 60 60 found between the under and the relax task tuned controllers.
40 40 40 Thisresultrevealsthatthedesignspaceavailableforselecting
20 20 20 an appropriate tuning profile is larger than expected: a range
0 0 0
NHF UT RT OT NHF UT RT OT NHF UT RT OT of values between the admittance characteristics of the under
(d)TLXTemporal (e)TLXPerformance (f)TLXEffort and relax task tuned controllers can improve user acceptance
relative to manual control. This conclusion also implies that
100 4 4
a selection between these two tuning options depends on the
80 3 3
specific application of haptic cues and the experience of the
60
40 2 2 intendeduserwithhapticinterfaces.Forapplicationsinvolving
20 1 1 inexperienced users (e.g. car driving), under-tuning the haptic
0 NHF UT RT OT 0 NHF UT RT OT 0 UT RT OT controller(uptohalfthestrengthoftherelaxtaskcontroller)is
(g)TLXFrustration (h)SA (i)HA an acceptable option as a tendency was found in this research
Fig.8. Mediansandinterquartilerangesofthesubjectivedependentvariables, for subjects to prefer the smallest haptic assistance necessary
with outliers (+). SA stands for Situational Awareness and HA for Haptic tocompleteagiventask.Forprofessionalsettings,asforUAV
Acceptance.
teleoperation,relaxtasktuningpresentsabettermiddleground
(ML: χ2(3) = 16.20, p ≤ 0.01; EF: χ2(3) = 15.91, between user acceptance and safety.
Due to the limited lateral visual cues supplied during the
p ≤ 0.01). This is in sharp contrast to earlier research
experiment, subjects had a greater appreciation for lateral
where haptic cues contributed negatively towards mental load
hapticcues.Howeverinthelongitudinaldirection,differences
and effort [5]. However, physical load (PL) continued to be
between haptic and visual cues provided led to ‘goal’ related
higher for the novel tuning method, and increased with the
conflicts.Theseconflictsneedtobeaddressedinthefutureto
strength of the haptic controller, a highly significant effect
(PL: χ2(3) = 25.23, p ≤ 0.01). Despite improvements in further improve user acceptance of HSC systems.
performance,frustrationandtemporalloadforUT/RT,TPdid REFERENCES
not result in statistically relevant effects for these measures.
[1] D. A. Abbink, M. Mulder, and E. R. Boer, “Haptic shared control:
Box plots for subjective situational awareness (SA) and smoothly shifting control authority?” Cognition, Technology & Work,
hapticfeedbackacceptance(HA)aregiveninFigs.8hand8i. vol.14,no.1,pp.19–28,Mar.2012.
[2] P. G. Griffiths and R. B. Gillespie, “Sharing control between humans
Forthesetwoindicators,highersubjectiveratingsimplybetter
andautomationusinghapticinterface:primaryandsecondarytaskper-
SA and HA. A Friedman test showed a highly significant formancebenefits,”HumanFactors:TheJournaloftheHumanFactors
effect of TP on SA, with the highest and lowest median SA andErgonomicsSociety,vol.47,no.3,pp.574–590,Sep.2005.
recorded for RT and NHF respectively (SA: χ2(3) = 11.58, [3] D. A. Abbink, “Neuromuscular analysis of haptic gas pedal feedback
duringcarfollowing,”PhD,DelftUniversityofTechnology,Delft,2006.
p≤0.01).AsimilartrendwasfoundforHA,withthehighest [4] T.M.Lam,“HapticinterfaceforUAVteleoperation,”Ph.D.dissertation,
acceptance for RT and the lowest for OT, a significant effect DelftUniversityofTechnology,Delft,May2009.
(HA: χ2(2)=8.21, p≤0.05). [5] T. M. Lam, M. Mulder, and M. M. van Paassen, “Haptic interface
for UAV collision avoidance,” The International Journal of Aviation
The results of the three subjective questionnaires indicate Psychology,vol.17,no.2,pp.167–195,2007.
thatacceptanceofhapticcuesincreasedforUTandRThaptic [6] D. A. Abbink, D. Cleij, M. Mulder, and M. M. Van Paassen, “The
importance of including knowledge of neuromuscular behaviour in
controllers. Over-tuning the controller was found to be more
haptic shared control,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference on
detrimental than providing no haptic support. This supports Systems,Man,andCybernetics(SMC),Oct.2012,pp.3350–3355.
the notion that heuristic tuning can adversely impact user [7] D.A.AbbinkandM.Mulder,“Neuromuscularanalysisasaguideline
indesigningsharedcontrol,”AdvancesinHaptics,vol.109,2010.
acceptance of HSC systems.
[8] J.Lasschuit,T.Lam,M.Mulder,M.M.VanPaassen,andD.Abbink,
“Measuring and modeling neuromuscular system dynamics for haptic
V. CONCLUSION interfacedesign,”inProceedingoftheAIAAModelingandSimulation
TechnologiesConferenceandExhibit,Aug.2008.
The primary objective of this study is to validate a sys-
[9] J. Smisek, M. M. van Paassen, M. Mulder, and D. A. Abbink, “Neu-
tematic tuning approach for haptic shared control (HSC) romuscularanalysisbasedtuningofhapticsharedcontrolassistantfor
systems that uses neuromuscular admittance measurements UAVcollisionavoidance,”inIEEEWorldHapticsConfrence,2013.
[10] T. M. Lam, H. W. Boschloo, M. Mulder, and M. M. van Paassen,
of the human arm. The results of an experiment conducted
“ArtificialforcefieldforhapticfeedbackinUAVteleoperation,”IEEE
to validate the novel tuning approach showed that subjective Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and
workloadandsituationalawarenessimprovedsignificantlyfor Humans,vol.39,no.6,pp.1316–1330,Nov.2009.
View publication stats